AI IN AEC 2026 - SNAPSIGHT AI SUMMARIES
Generated: 2026-03-25T09:54:54.171Z
================================================================================

================================================================================
SESSION 1: Opening of the AI in AEC 2026
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

OK, good morning. Welcome. Find the seat.

Maybe some people come a little bit late because there was like, you know, network in the evening yesterday, so.

some someone can do it better than others, so.

But nice to see you here

Uh, you have got emails and text messages about this event app. So please upload it in your mobile phone.

You can use it through your browser.

or you can upload it from that link that there if you go to the settings, then you'll get the link and you can get the actual app also.

And you can follow there, for example, you can put the, there are two streams that we are going to use today because they also do rooms and if you go for this stream where we are now, there you can, for example, select polls. So there is at the moment first questions, this kind of polls, about how many events you have attended in this conference series. Those polls can be during the day. So if you are a presenter or chair, you can ask organizer to

arrange some kind of call if you want. That is like a test for us now that you can see it.

Oh, maybe I

say some slide

So actually, so we have arranged this already. This is like 6th time we started during the COVID time and

surprised they went 2020 never realized because the COVID hit also our country. So then we have been 3 times virtual and now 3 times. This is the 3rd time we are hybrid. And people have loved this one because there's lots, lots of better way to, way to network when we are in this kind of hybrid events.

But, uh, we have also called it the information of older events. So if you go to the website of the event, you can see the all the orderer events material that are shared slice. So you can check the program, you can also check, uh,

slides that has been searched for the participants.

This year we have a moment there's something a little bit new.

So if you go to the event tab and maybe we can solve it also in, in the screen, the snapsite now.

You can check later the result of the ball, yeah.

OK, we will soon see there also images of a snap sites. So there is a snap site in our event event platform and what it does, you can select the language and it's automatically, automatically doing notes for you. Also, key takeabase uh ID clouds and such.

So let's see how well it understands my English. I'll see you soon.

But, uh, please use it so it helps you to make the nodes automatically.

We have, we are all like, uh, they are registered partisans over 300.

from 38 countries. It is the highest number so far with this event, 82% have registered themselves to be here on site at the venue.

Uh, partners, you can see the partner des desk, thanks for all the partners they have helped us to keep moderate price for this event.

and also thanks for all the supporters that have been involved here. All in all, we have almost 50, 50% presentation.

from 4 different continents. Each presentation excluding keynotes, so it's a little bit longer. Kinoonga Patadowa's presentation of 20 have 20 minutes slots. And during that slot end of the presentation is uh for Q&A and also for change in room because we have like two rooms next to each other. You can easily, easily change from the if you, if you prefer some presentation from another session you can change the room easily during this present

ation

break, maybe change. Ah, great. Ah, last year. Also tomorrow in our closing season we will publish the feedback for you very feedback link where you can put feedback about the event and also you will get the emails and reminders about that one. So please give us a feedback.

We have always read them very thoroughly and also develop events according to those one.

If it, if I take what we got last year, there are some highlights here.

So people, one would say there was satisfied people, but of course there was also

so also some comments that pushed us to make it a little bit further.

For example, the place was something that people felt that maybe the venue would be a little bit bigger, would be nice.

So we took, took that advice and

arranged it so

So 2 days

uh soon I will announce our first keynote speaker, Doctor Sam Sulfakarion, maybe I pronounce it right.

Thanks. I haven't practiced it, so

thanks

Uh

which, which will, uh, which will be the main presentation in this opening session. And also it's a good presentation in that sense if you think about all these two days. It's like painting the scenery of the whole, whole days is what we are going to discuss about it.

Uh, then after the coffee break, we will divide us in two separate rooms.

Yup. So here we continue with the AI implementation. I will be sharing that one and in the beginning of East says and there's like 5 minutes slot.

where the chair can a little bit give you the idea why, what is the ideal in that session why the uh selective presenter is in the uh what is the red line? What is the storyline of the season.

And then we have the actual presentation near Paro. There is a demo session

I don't know if there's going to happen in some demo effect, but that's OK, in that presentation, in that session, then we have a lunch. We have a nice time for lunch. Then you can also do some email work and such. It happens to be so that people have to do with those.

Then again we separate in two different sessions, multi-agent AI and workflows and AI technology and systems.

And after last coffee, we come back to this room, everyone.

and we have the last session where we start with the keynote. It helps us, our thought to turn into the panel which has been typically quite successful in these events. People have loved these panels. So they are

oh, sorry, they are 4 top big stop discussers panelists, and they are, then there are two moderators. It surely will be very interesting.

And if you have booked yourself to the evening dinner, then we have like 2.5 hour slot before that evening dinner.

And actually, the dinner

dinner is uh about

26 minutes if I remember correct. 26 minutes from here. Uh, less than 2 kilometers. You can take a tram or taxi. You can walk. I don't know. It's not maybe it's not raining today, today. So,

I, then the second day

uh

the keynote of the second day is done so that it's like a teaser already in the platform. You can watch it there if you haven't yet, so we are not going to stream it here. We have only live presentation here. So we are dividing us again to the two different rooms, depending on

how late you had discussion, uh, to you shall have discussion today depending on that one, you can choose the decision on other ones, starts a little bit late.

So then some coffee again, divide into two different rooms.

sustain and per business models and concepts, so I design.

Then after lunch

computational design and construction, and that constructs a little bit links us to our final session, which is after short coffee break.

closing session where we have we secret, secret prayer coan will discuss with us about future construction sites.

So that is something that is going to be, I would say, happen in the next phase of this AI implementation.

We are, we are heading, heading in the time where we have more about physical AIs. Actually, some tools are written there if you check that blog, but about where we are heading in this field of business.

And in that sense, I think the last keynote also nicely the first keynote today paints the scenery. I think the last keynote tells what is the future and where we are heading and what kind of presentation most likely we'll have here in our event in the future.

So what it means when these kind of big changes happen. This is something that I have also talked a lot of with the universities.

universities are at least our country. I'm happy that construction, construction site universities have took this seriously, not other universities in other field of industry. So

it's very important that young people learn how to use these tools or at the school, at the university, because we need those kind of people also in our work life. We are the kind of business where we need a lot of resources. We are lack of resources at the moment, so they will help us when we are doing our work, but if you think about the future, so it will be a little bit that kind of situation that if you have that pyramid kind of organizational structures

today, so it will be more like obelisk in that sense that it's a little bit of a challenge for the younger people to come to the work life in that sense, but if they are good with the AR skills, so they are warmly welcomed to the companies.

Then one thought

one thought, uh, good to keep in mind. This I have heard from Aristoil last month, former chairman of Nokia, founder of cybersecurity company Eiura, an investor in over 15 companies. If you think about AI implemented, so which is also next session of Sam's keynote piece speeds, uh, if you talk about AI implementation, so of course it's good that you develop your culture and it's very important. You take small steps

bit by tip, bit tip, but that is also only small bushes that would put you further.

Parallel to that, you should also think what could be even something more bigger. So I think this is very nicely said.

They with AI, you shouldn't aim for 50% improvements, but 500% improvements or even 5000. Only then will you have

to rethink the entire process and then AISO its true power. So if you want to make a big prey, that is something you have to turn your thoughts a little bit different.

So

welcome all. Alex there's also places people want in front, if people want to come to sit here and enjoying the next, next presentation which will be very interesting.

So I'm

I'm happy

I'm I'm happy to inform our first keynote speaker.

So AI is no longer a future technology. It's reshaping industry right now, and the or organization that learn how to harness it will define the next era of business.

Our first keynote speaker today helps leaders understand how to do exactly that.

So, Doctor San Solakkarian, please welcome, uh

ah, OK, did I already lost my slide?

So if you, OK, great.

Yeah, so you are strategically bestselling author and co-founder of Yakite. So this is one of your books Disrupt it published last year, in March, and you will publish the book is called Future by Design, which is focusing on individual um improvement and how we can prepare ourselves as a human for uh the age of AI. Yeah, this book is focusing on the organization level. Yeah, and I have to say this is very impressive your

background and your work, what you have done. If you think about generative design and what is we all know what is, what it is nowadays, but you have worked with that already in 2016, so 1010 years ago we used to use generative design to figure out how we can design airplane components to make them lighter so that they can be 3D printed and you can save on fuel and be more sustainable. I know Europe is so concerned about sustainability and the future of humanity. So that was one of the purpose

behind that initiative. Oh, great. So I'm, I'm very happy that we have you here. So please enjoy the presentation I revealing in hearing. Thank you. Now you can kill my presentation.

Because we plan to do a live event of a task group on AI, which is on my last slide. Every year during this event, so it's great to be here. Uh, maybe I get the next slide.

Yeah, thanks, OCRB it's a collaboration for innovation in the build environment. We originated Nextli please, uh, from a French

abbreviation consul International de Baltimore. Pullarierleitu de illa document. I have to check this every time due to the difficult name. Thank you for that. Uh, but having an eye nowadays is much easier, so we can just do the translation. But really it's about innovation. We started, uh, quite some time ago. If you can give the next slide. I can see them here, so thanks. Uh, so, uh, really we're looking into all kinds of uh activities where we can uh help the industry in getting more profitable

cleaner, etc. etc. But nowadays, of course, as was mentioned in the previous talk, AI is going in as a big game changer, but how to do that? It's a lot about uh learning from what people are doing in different countries

COB is actually uh focusing on the whole lifecycle of construction, but we are getting input from, uh, from China, input from Canadian, uh, from Australia, Europe, and uh sadly enough, not everybody's as far as here in Finland, but I think a lot can be learned from sharing this activities, uh, among Sichuras. And if you can give me the next slide

uh, that's actually what we're there for. So we are a global network, more than 60 countries are there, different, uh, participants coming from academia, research institutes, and companies.

Not that many companies yet, so it's also a call to action if companies would like to uh to join. We're here with the booth and there will be one in the next slide, but please don't go there yet. Don't, don't go there yet. This was the difficulty. Um, so, uh, there will be, uh, information about us uh on, on the slide, but especially go to the booth because we live in the time of AI, but it's very good to meet people and really start discussing things because a lot can be

done by AI, but it's also about how do we work together with AI but also especially with each other.

In order to do that, we have different task groups and working groups, uh, but the one I really recommend or at least like to mention here, is the Dash Group AI and struction. Actually, uh, Pia Sermonum was supposed to be here this morning. She couldn't make it, but she will be there in the afternoon and certainly tomorrow, because then we have the life, uh working group session

This time open for everybody who would like to join. Of course, when you would like to join uh in the continuation, you'll have to join CIB as well. So again, this is a marketing exercise for this part, but really it's worthwhile to, to come and meet with us. So if you go to the next slide

then you get more information and I just made it in the last 1 2nd. So thanks for your your attendance and uh looking forward to meeting everybody while being here or by internet or whatever means.

Thanks.

Bye.

Great

And then there's Mattiashire because we from Eins Group Eins inert.

I think you are a better clicker user than me. Big green person forward. OK.

Let's see

Maybe soon. For instance, I'm Mattias herebikowski. I'm technology manager.

at Es Group. Let's see, cream pattern. We need some help. OK, uh, last night I was traveling here from the north by the train, and I felt excitement because I was thinking about the previous events and I think I'm one of those who has joined each and every one of those. And I thought like, uh, so much knowledge, so much insights is being shared here. You

you know, they're all saying about breaking the silos, and I truly believe that here we can do that. We can push

the industry forward and now it's working. Great.

Uh, and I think that's one reason why Eins Group is also partner of this event because we truly want to push this industry forward. We have 1400 employees, and we have experts on all different kinds of fields. So I, I think we can have that impact on the society.

But I could use here quite colorful adjectives. Tell the story about heroes, but I rather encourage you to take this sessions. There we have our experts telling some insights, sharing our knowledge and telling how, how these things can be done. Also, I think we are taking this a bit too seriously because we have the food over there where we can discuss more about these things.

But I hope you all have really inspiring, uh, events here and let's discuss further.

Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you, Mattias

Great. And then we hear a bird from Sweko, Loulan, and Mika Papoa. Ah, you have Michael already. Yeah.

So one for, one for you and you want my great.

Oh, perfect.

Uh, thank you and welcome. My name is Luca and I'm the chief digital officer from Circo Belgium. Uh, and it means, yeah, Imiko Papore, I, I have the same role in Finland and we wanted to show that one of the best use cases of AI in our industry here and also promotes VEco GPT so OK, let's go forward if this works. Yeah. So in SO we are leading

European architectural and engineering company. In this moment, we are working in 15 countries and delivering projects across the world, and we are providing a different expertise in, yeah, all the solving the most complex uh

today's, uh, society challenges. But what we're doing in Finland, Miko. Yeah, let's go forward. We have around 3000 employees all around Finland, so nearly 30 cities and having more than 10,000 projects per year. I'm seeing the timer is going quite fast, so let's go forward. What do you want to say about green transition? I said already, our expertise is really to be focused on all the things that are happening in the

green transition. So from the energy, from the industry, from the urban, but also transportation, mobility challenges that we are trying to solve.

Yeah

A few words about AI at Svico, so uh.

uh we have these 3 different streams and basically if I put it really short, we want to automate so the internal efficiency efficiency size uh site. We want to enhance the current services we feel and we know that our customers and stakeholders are smart, so we need to improve our current offering. It, it won't uh be the same in uh in few weeks, in few months, in few years. And then the

final thing is to really make new services and be innovative like I think that was a great use case from 3M to invest 15% to that uh Aile and innovation culture.

and if we wrap it up and like I inrito so we are really happy to be a partner. All our divisions are here from architects till uh project management, uh, we will have in that uh C panel discussed in our group C strategy officer and in addition, we have 3 great speakers, uh, speaking about um.

different topics, topics which can be seen here.

And also the booth outside that we can uh talk with each other. Yeah. Thank you very much. Thank you.

Thank you. And one of, one of your speakers is also a former program committee member, so

that's a great. Then let's go overseas. So ANTB Tef Segel.

You want clicker?

green button forward

This is this uh red pill.

Thank you. Uh, Jeff Siegel, uh, with HNTV really happy to be here and exploring what's going on in the international world. HMTB is a US based infrastructure solutions firm with over a century of services and infrastructure, but over time, starting as a railroad bridge company into all these services that you see above, with 60 offices and about 7500 employees nationally, including uh myself and my colleague Jesse Newber

ry here from our leadership of our digital infrastructure solutions practice where we have turned into a technology company is Doctor Sam talked about.

In that realm, uh, one of the areas of digital infrastructure that we're helping our clients. This is a great example from Dallas Fort Worth Airport, um, in Dallas, uh, where we're helping them with AI services contract, helping them take advantage of digital twin and um

uh machine learning and LOM solutions to help operate their mechanical equipment, more efficiently, more automatically, and helping them take advantage of the same type of challenges that we're taking, uh, within our, within our industry.

We're also, of course, looking at ourselves, and this is a great example of the suite of LAM tools we have implemented internally through our culture of innovation. Our champions network in the firm, helping us to be more efficient and help our clients, uh, to do things in new ways. Really happy to be here and I look forward to visiting with many of you throughout the conference.

Great, thanks

Thank you

And last but not least, let's go back to the old continent flow case Oscar Forspect.

So yeah, uh, hi everyone, uh,

the familiar concept of shit in, shit out is present in AI as well, and we in Flowcase, we're actually trying to reduce that quite a bit. So Flowcase offers a platform where you can easily and accessibly manage the most important data you have. Your employees skills and your project experience. Uh, some of the companies attending here are already using uh Flowcase, but, uh, we still have room for more. Uh,

one of the most prominent AI features we have at the moment is that you can simply upload a big document to our platform. Uh, it will scan through the documents, find the required uh requirements and recommended uh requirements of that specific bid and automatically match it.

with the most suitable uh employees you have based on the data you stored in the platform. It will even be possible to create a first tailored version out of that CV in order to be super efficient and make the whole process automatic.

We have a booth outside. I'm happy to show you more about the platform, and yeah, just come say hi, have an energy drink or a snack.

Perfect. Thank you

Thank you.

Oh, thank you everybody for uh morning attention. So now you have a short coffee break and then we divided into two different rooms and please network and enjoy these two days. Thank you.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The opening session of "AI in AEC 2026," led by Vesa Järvinen, offered a detailed overview of the event's structure, tools, and themes, emphasizing collaboration and innovation in the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industry. The hybrid format, combining virtual and on-site participation, has evolved since its inception during the COVID-19 pandemic, attracting over 300 participants from 38 countries, the highest attendance in the event's history. Attendees were encouraged to use the event app, which facilitates polls, provides access to shared materials, and features a "snapsight" tool for automatic note-taking and key takeaways.

Partner contributions were acknowledged for enabling moderate pricing, supporting a diverse audience to engage with 50 presentations from four continents. Keynote presentations, longer than regular sessions, were highlighted as pivotal moments, beginning with Dr. Sam Solfakarian's insights into AI's transformative potential. His talk set the stage for discussions on AI implementation, multi-agent workflows, sustainable business models, and computational design. The closing keynote by Sigrid Perkan will explore future construction sites, linking physical AI advancements to industry evolution.

Logistical details, including the evening dinner located 26 minutes from the venue, were shared to ensure smooth planning. Feedback links will be provided at the event's conclusion to gather attendee input for future improvements. Universities' role in AI education was emphasized, with a call for young professionals skilled in AI to address resource shortages. Risto Siilasmaa's advice to aim for transformative AI goals rather than incremental improvements resonated throughout the session.

Innovative tools like Flowcase, which streamlines employee skill management, and SVECO GPT, focusing on green transition challenges, were showcased. HNTB's AI services for infrastructure, including digital twin applications, demonstrated practical AI applications in the industry. The CIB task group on AI in construction invited participants to collaborate on advancing AI adoption globally. Overall, the session underscored the importance of ambitious goals, collaboration, and leveraging AI to redefine the future of the AEC industry.

Speakers

VJ

Vesa Järvinen

chair of the programme committee

AINS Group

================================================================================
SESSION 2: Opening Session Keynote 1 - The Future of AEC Work in an AI-Driven Environment
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

The ROI, don't worry, these are not real money. So they deployed, they bought licenses for GPT. They deployed AI and even they released their own AI agents, and now they're waiting for the transformation to happen.

But there isn't any

What's the problem

The problem is they're trying to fit something that is not built for the human, for the last 50 years, we build organization around human limitations. We try to fit ourselves in the system, but now something big has changed.

Now we're not in the age of human intelligence. We're in the age of algorithmic intelligence.

We're in the age of algorithmic intelligence where algorithms can analyze millions points of data and give us more insights.

Let me give you some examples.

Back in time, we used to spend hours, weeks for proposal. Do the analysis. Look at the client's past projects and see what's happening in the market and do our best guess.

Sounds familiar for anyone, but there is a go no go projects, right? And it took like what? weeks, months, and we try to do our best guess. But now it's changing. Now we have AI tools that they don't do the guesswork. They act based on data. They looked at your past projects. They looked at the client's preferences, specs, and they even look at the market trends to let you know

whether it's a go or no go project. You can look at the skills that you have in the company and make an informed decisions.

Let me share a personal experience from my early career.

What we do at the early of our career.

For me was counting walls, doors, windows, and do the quantity takeoff.

My number never match, never ever, and I tried to do the average and it usually took me like days, weeks, depending on the size of the project.

Now, there are tools that they can help you with that.

You can simply use like tools like Toggle, and by the way, there isn't any connection between me and these tools that I'm sharing here, but I just wanna like let you know what's possible today for AC fans.

Tools like this, they can analyze your drawings through the quantity takeoff. What a waste of my time.

So they can do more accurate.

and do it more accurate quantity takeoff and also do it faster rather than weeks, months, they can do it in a matter of minutes.

And it's not just proposal, quantity takeoff, even for could uh code checking. Now there are tools that, that can help you to the code check-ins for drawings.

Design review

expects

These are all time-consuming manual processes.

There isn't any shortage of AI tools. That's what I'm trying to say here. I bet after this conference, you go back to your organization with 1 or 2 tools that you want to try.

There are many AI tools in the market.

but the transformation is not happening.

Why

Because companies

trying to install the Formula One engine on the horse carriage.

The system that has been designed for human limitations for what we could do.

And that's why the transformation is not happening.

so we are still waiting for ROI. We want to see, OK, I invested in co-pilot, GPTs, other AI tools, but I'm not seeing ROI. What should I do? Why the adoption rate is low. One of the challenges that I'm hearing every day is like, we bought co-pilot 100C or 150 seeds and the adoption is just 5 seats. What should we do?

The trend

let's look at other industries. I want to take you to the other industries and what's happening in other industries and why we're in the age of disruption and how we can get ourselves ready.

Adabi, who doesn't know Adabi?

They've been

you did that

Good. So and that they renowned for creative work.

We've literally use them for design, PDFs, everything. They have 32,000 talented employees, and they've been around for 3443 years.

Pardon my number, Dobby, but they've been disrupted with mid journey which back in time only had 11 employees.

a 32,000 employees company.

43 years in the market has been disrupted with the company with just 11 employees.

Did I go back

No wonder everyone is confused.

What Sam is talking about. Sorry, so

Google, they build a trillion dollars search company.

You give the uh question and it goes provides you a list of links, and your job was to search and find the answer.

They've been disrupted with companies like Perplexity.

Perplexity doesn't give you a list of links, and like half of them are ads.

They give you the answer.

So we move from the age of surge to the age of censuses.

We want the answer

and it's not just these companies. Look at transportation.

The taxi industry all around the world was disrupted with ride sharing apps like Uber.

And while these two were fighting.

something happened

Uber, do you know how many AI models they have.

to get you to your destination.

Anyone, any guests

Just throw a number.

Oh, come on, 250. They, there's an article that they say they have 250 AI models running in the background to just run the Uber app and the system itself, but do we know? No, for us it's 0, right? Because we don't notice those AI systems working in the back. So why taxi industry was fighting with ride sharing apps. Something happened.

Both of them are disrupted with self-driving cars.

Anyone try self-driving cars.

Nice, Kim

Yeah, so if you come to San Francisco, they're everywhere about 30% of cars in San Francisco or like self-driving cars, waymo or Xux.

This is actually me trying way more two years ago.

So they're using AI and the car is driving all around the city by itself.

For me, I love it. I'm an introvert. I don't have to say hi to the driver, and I just get in the car and I leave. For me it's like a heaven.

and I hope it doesn't take me to the heaven.

but it's good

to the point here is like these technologies, AI are disrupting the way that we used to live and work.

Some people may say Sam.

rebuild infrastructure we build buildings.

We're not a tech company

but I like to challenge that mindset.

because we're in the new era

This is the app I use

Large vision model 2 years ago.

I give it like an image and I just be a simple prong.

simple English. How many workers are on this image?

This large vision model analyzed the photo, told me how many

workers are in the image and is also generated me a code that I could use to build an app that can count the number of workers on the site.

and it took me like a few minutes to do so.

Imagine your employees at the company have access to these tools to build it themselves.

without any computer science background without any coding background.

and that's why companies like AECom, they acquired the

an AI company

because they want to disrupt. They don't want to be disrupted.

They know the change is happening.

Anyone from a come here.

OK

I wish there was because I wanted to catch up with them to see how it's going. So my point here is, the world is changing.

Technology are being more accessible. We can build apps ourselves, and I'm not saying we're going to be tech company to sell software like Trimble Autodisk. No, my point is there are some problems. There are some opportunities that our company that we can simply solve it ourselves.

without any computer science background. It means every industry is changing and every company can be a tech company.

with these possibilities with what AI is providing for us.

The question is not

if AI is going to disrupt us.

It will

The key question is, are we ready for that?

There isn't any shortage of tool.

I promise

But is our organization ready? Are we going to get the ROI now I need to collect my money here.

How we can make it happen

how we can prepare our organization for the age of AI. I'm going to share three angles here. The first one is fostering the culture of innovation.

The second one is reimagining your business model.

They are at the beginning talks about the business 5000.

and not just 50% efficiency.

or looking at the process workflow differently.

and operating model, how we can revisit our operating model because it's built for human for human limitations.

and what I'm going to share here everything is based on what we've done in the last few years with AEC firms. We've turned over 10,000 employees.

The majority are in the US in terms of adopting AIM making their company the leader in the new age.

And those lessons learned are

captured in this book disrupted. I have two copies.

and I'm going to have a competition for those two copies if

um you wanna read it back on your way home, on your way back home.

So before I told you that there isn't any shortage of uh tools, and I wanna

give you this. And if you're interested based on what we've done in the last few years, um, I documented the most common AI use cases and tools and just provide me your email address and I send it to you when I'm back to my room.

I take a minute here.

if anyone is interested?

You want me thumbs up, it's done.

Yes. Nice, real fast. So let's just start with the first one, Fostering culture of innovation.

When a new technology comes, it's so easy that we just go and grab it and want to try it, bring it to the company, and we're expecting the adoption. We are excited about the tool and we want everyone like uh adopt the tool, use it within the project.

But there is a challenge here.

To explain that challenge, I want to take you back to 1926.

when microphones were invented.

There is a scene in the movie Babylon.

that is showing how a new technology created the mess.

at this uh scene.

So

Margot Robbie is playing Nellie's role, and Nellie was a famous celebrity.

in that movie, but

the director decided to bring microphones unseen, and he was expecting Nellie, still do a good job.

Let's see how Nelly did

She blew the valves. I just need a minute. All right, well, hurry, Ms. LeRoy. What would really help us would be if you said the line like a little more quietly.

Action

Oh hello no good for sound. How Lloyd, could you just let us get through one tape? Why would I do that if you won't be able to use it? told me to do it quiet. That's why I did it's not inarticulate. You can't mumble.

Hi, this is Joanne from Mother fucking. What you put the up now. I'm here in a high pitched noise.

Hello Colin, you're Mark.

This it's like a million. We got to move the mic, or you could direct her to hit her. Why is it so hard? Oh, you're right, I didn't realize you were making Ben-Hur. I can move it. I can move it right now. Who year is wide open. I mean, we could shoot this thing through New Year's.

The point here was

that they just bought technology on the scene, microphone, and they were expecting Nellie still does a good job, did she?

It was difficult for her to figure out the body gesture, the tone, and everything else.

But what's the solution?

The solution doesn't have to be complex and expensive.

I like to share how Citibank solved that problem.

Citibank is one of number 5 banks in the US.

For them, they have about 200,000 employees across the globe, 82 countries, and training everyone to use AI could be expensive and time consuming.

The way that they solve the problem was they decided to focus on one person high performer.

and train them around AI, how to use AI, what it looks like.

They played the AI champion's role.

for the whole company

They went back to the region.

and they trained, trained

other employees, colleagues,

They use the network effect system here.

It wasn't a big investment for them.

or time consuming

And as a result, now every employee at the company is using AI.

and trying to like escape those like repetitive tasks, manual tasks, and help their clients.

And these AI champions to make it happen, they need time for experimentation.

and like going and train others.

In AEC, at least in the US, most companies are making money. They make money based on maximizing employees utilization.

So the more work, the more hours in a project means more money, at least for AE firms.

So it's difficult to create that space for innovation. Give us space, time to those AI champions.

but there is a simple solution.

It doesn't have to be complex.

3M. Anyone knows what 3M stands for?

TriM?

Yes, close.

Minnesota mining and manufacturing. Yes.

so is Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company.

They've been listed

for a long time as one of the most innovative companies.

How a mining company can surpass tittle, Tesla. This is from 2018.

in innovation

How that's possible

William McKnight, he joined the company as a bookkeeper assistant in 1917, and then he was promoted after a few years to be the president and run the company.

In 1947, he set the rule.

The rule was 15% culture.

15% means every employee can spend 15% of their time on innovation, experimentation, and break the work that they do.

They could break the rules

Disposit is a result of that 15%.

culture

35% of their revenue is coming from this 15%.

So by just giving their employees extra time to experiment, break the way that they work.

They could be listed continuously as one of the innovative companies.

in top 500 Fortune 500.

The point here is

our employees need time.

to experience, to learn.

and if they're just focused on day to day jobs, it makes it difficult to find a way

to experience, experiment with AI.

How does it work in our industry because again we need to maximize our employees' utilization, at least in some companies in AC.

SSOE

SSOE is one of the top AE firms in the US.

and their number one in semiconductor.

design

And they've been doing like data centers, schools, hospitals, different projects.

What they've done to foster that culture of innovation was they combined the method that Citibank had.

with 3M

They provided the training for all for uh portion of their employees plus the board members.

because they wanted to get their buying for the investment as well, right? So they wanted to make sure that everyone has the same understanding around AI.

and also they gave them that space for innovation. So those they are champions, they went back to the office and they tried to share that knowledge that they've learned.

that network effects system that we talked about earlier, and they've done it like 3.5 years ago, not right now.

The moment that they felt the industries is changing, they've decided to take this approach.

and lead the innovation at this in this industry.

I want to show a short video of the CEO and the experience that he had back in time based on this approach.

you know, the robots are coming, uh, the, you know, humans aren't going to have any decision making process. All these, all these media-driven things come to mind, but when we really got down to it, it worked, we self just create just a pipeline of projects that everyone said, wow, these are things that can help us right now in the business that we do on a daily basis

So what they've done, the outcome of that approach for them was they could create that pipeline of opportunities that AI could help them. So by fostering that culture of innovation and that culture of innovation is the foundation of this new era.

They could make that change.

So when we think if we're ready for the age of AI, we need to think how the uh the culture of innovation is working at our company. What's our employee's mindset? Are they excited about AI or they have the fear of losing their jobs to AI.

Do we give them enough space to experience experiment and break the way the workflow, the job that they have in day to day.

What's our approach to make it happen, to build that culture of innovation.

and how we can maximize balance that maximizing employees utilization with that

space for innovation itself.

The second element of being ready for the age of AI is business model.

With AI everything is changing. So in the next decade,

it's not our competitors that is going to do what we do better.

The next ticket belongs to those who are going to make what we do irrelevant.

based on the new opportunities that are possible.

right now with AI, there are many opportunities that can impact our business models.

and I want to touch on a few of them. The first one is like personalization.

The second one is insight.

and the third one is new market, how we can scale our expertise.

Levi's, in terms of personalization, voice they've been around for the last 147 years, they always had resellers that were selling those jeans, the products themselves. Now with AI they want to take back

that control. They want to have direct

connection

to their consumers

They want to use AI to personalize the style of their consumers, their customers.

the way that they were, the way that the gene fits their body. They want to personalize the whole product itself.

and that personalization is moving to the next level, which is called anticippoy intelligence. What it means is companies like Amazon

they have our order in the warehouse before we even placed the order.

Maybe Alexa tells them. I don't know.

but they monitor our behavior, our approach to figure out what's the possibility of ordering a product.

and they procure it on their warehouse.

and now most of their warehouse

they have like robots that is doing the work itself.

Netflix

Netflix, in order to maximize the time we spent on their platform, they use that personalization. They use AI for personalizing the experience and also predict which movie you may, you may watch next.

The sop nails of the movie that for the same movie that I see.

is different from what you see.

If we like romance, it might for the same movie, it might be the kissing.

if you like action, it might be a car chase.

for the same movie

They're personalizing our experience in that level of details.

by using AI

What does it mean for us?

how we can personalize our experience, our client's experience. Earlier I talked about go no go decision for proposals which projects you want to move on with.

How we AI can enable us.

to personalize

those approach based on what our clients do based on what they prefer. Based on the past projects that we've done with that clients, how we can shine in front of them differently.

with the power of AI.

Make it more like connection with them rather than just something generic.

that GPTs can just populate.

That's where the power of personalization by using AI comps.

We take it to the next level.

Besides personalization, companies are moving from products to insights.

You see Luca

back in 1960, Messeri Siduka, he assaulted the company.

for fabricating um a street furniture.

kiosk

bus stations

and he wants to help with cities, and most of their customers, they were municipalities.

What municipalities have in common

at least in the US

is they don't have enough money.

to afford what we want to sell them, right? And you see the car was like, how I can expand my market.

and what he proposed was like, what if I build everything

install

and maintain them for free.

The point here is not saying that oh, we should be free. That was her, his approach, but how he could build $4 billion company.

but selling ads.

So he used those infrastructure, kiosks, bus stations,

as an a place to sell ads.

And now with AI they're partnering with an AI company, Clue.

because they want to take it to the next level in their business model.

They want to see how they can customize and it's a combination of personalization for those at companies based on the weather, based on days of the week based on the time of the day.

which ad should be displayed?

They're providing those insights for their clients and then they display those ads.

and now they can charge more because it's really targeted.

They're changing from selling just products and like displaying ads to sell that insights with that AI company.

So for us is like this, I talk about personalization. I talk about products to insights, and the third one that I mentioned was um a scaling expertise. Now knowledge is being abundant.

So in the past it used to take us years

to obtain expertise.

Now it's easier.

much easier

and

does it mean that it's raised to the bottom for our industry.

because some clients didn't services that we used to sell them, the insights that we use to provide them now could be available online. They just can go and get it.

Maybe not

We trim is an engineering company number under under 10 in the US in reservoir water.

and for them, again, the uh they're dealing with municipalities, and 65% of municipalities in the US are small.

They don't have enough money

And with AI where Tre was like, how we can

provide our services, our expertise to those municipalities at lower costs.

So now they're using AI to optimize the process of design.

for

city pipelines, water reservoir, everything.

so that they can

those municipalities can afford them.

It doesn't mean that they go cheaper, but they're reducing their operation costs with the power of AI.

so

we talked about Levi's using AI to personalizing the way that they interact with their customers, consumers, Amazon and Nettle's doing the anticipatory um intelligence.

that Jesse Ducadu is selling the insights with the power of AI and weighting trying to move from just doing the projects into like scaling their expertise that could be affordable with more

uh bigger market

So how that value may look like for us.

at our company, what we can do.

with the power of AI

personalization, insights,

or scaling our expertise.

Maybe we know what our clients may need before they know it themselves.

We have the data. We know their past projects.

and we can connect them to market trends and maybe getting better insights that we go to our clients rather than waiting for them to send us the proposal.

It's like being more proactive rather than reacting to their proposals and requests.

So the third piece that I talked about in terms of getting our organization ready for the age of AI was operating model itself.

and

none of these culture as the foundation, business model as a new value generator.

with AI and

we need

to change our processes. We can do it on what we have that is built around human and human limitations.

Uh, this earlier talked about the pyramid and how it's changing in terms of the organ structure. So if you look at your organization and structure likely there are many like uh hierarchy of people

and they work together.

and we have workflows, and most companies uh right now with AI they're trying to

use AI for writing emails.

proposals, submissions like ViCA DVTs or summarizing a report

These are great

Like why we should spend hours to just read like 100 pages of a report itself if we can uh act smarter.

In most cases, they're probably 10%.

or 20% efficiency.

How we can make it 10.

Wessel set the bar really high. He said 5000 eggs. I'm saying 10E. So, like how we can do the 10X work? How does it work?

Let me share an example here, AIG.

So AIG is one of the big insurance companies in the US

and for them, one of the main tasks is risk analysis.

They do the analysis for projects to see how risky it is.

They looked at PDF data that they have in the system, cloud.

and they looked at the market trends and everywhere like data is everywhere scattered all over the place.

and it takes them months, weeks to do the calculation and say this project is risky, we should go with it or not.

With AI they decided to change their workflows and see how they can optimize it better with the power of AI.

and

what they've done now, they have their own AI system.

that is looking at the data that they have in the company, the market trends, the client's preferences and do their risk analysis in a matter of minutes.

And the estimation is by 2030, like from 2018, which uh the business premium was $0.3 billion. They would get into $4 billion.

and they can handle more projects and do more risk analysis because with AI it's getting faster.

and

the way that they did it, they changed the workflow.

because sometimes

we look for a tool that could fit within our process, and it's really difficult to find a tool that fits within our process, and that was the challenge they had. So they decided to change the workflow, and that's how AI could enable them, and that's their target by 2030. But these changes, changes in workflows are not just limited to the digital world. Even it's happening in the physical world.

So in the physical

this potato company

Pepsi

they have warehouse.

and factories all over the place in the globe, like hundreds of them and if they want to optimize the factory layout.

it's so risky

because they have to stop the production. And usually, the engineers come up with like a few scenarios that they think is less risky and they have to implement it, see how it works before scaling it.

So with AI now they're partnering with Zimans and Nvidia.

and they're creating a digital twin version of their factory layout so they can come up with more scenarios and do the simulation in the digital world.

and based on the results analysis that they get, then they go and implement it in the real world.

So now that process is data-driven.

rather than just some engineers sit and guess and come up with like 3 or 4 scenarios that we go and check it out whether it works or not.

And when we changed that workflow.

one component of our organization is being hugely impacted.

It's our people.

Now we need people with newer skills.

We need them to work differently.

Kodak

they didn't fail

because they didn't know digital photography. They literally invented it.

They failed because they kept hiring chemists.

That was their legacy

They were doing chemistry

for photography and they kept hiring chemists, and they didn't pay attention now with that digital photography. They need software engineers.

So chemists that were keep doing what they used to do, what they knew.

So the point here is

while we change our workflows.

our people should be upper scale or maybe rescale or maybe we need to look at our hiring differently. And PNG puts it in the research. PNG, they had one hypothesis that they wanted to test.

They said can AI be a cybernetic teammate.

What cybernetic teammates mean?

It means that AI can partner with their employees and can augment them. They can work together and do the, get the work done.

They had the marketing team that is just like client focused. They had the business, which is just like focusing on the products and these two never talked together.

and they didn't have their, each other's domain expertise. So they divided them into 4 groups.

teams with AI, teams with no AI, individuals with AI, individual with no AI.

If I get numbers here, which one do you think did better? Show me with your fingers.

1234.

22

3

2

Individuals with AI.

they did

better than teams who they are and even in a shorter amount of time.

and their results showed that yes, AI could be a cybernetic teammate.

The point here is with AI.

our teams may get smaller.

but mightier

because they can partner with an intelligent.

to do the work

and companies like Shopify or Duolingo.

Now they're looking at rather than like hiring a human looking if AI agents can do the work.

and get AI agents to do their work in partnership with their employees.

And what's going to happen as a result again Wessel mentioned that earlier, uh

during the opening, the hierarchy of our organization will change.

It's not going to be just people.

It's going to be a combination of human people, and AI agents that work together.

So

the transformation is not happening at the level of individual tasks. It's happening at the whole organization level.

Teams are changing, workflows are changing.

and our teams may get smaller but mightier.

They can do more with less.

and I would say they can do more with less, but more intelligently.

because they can have visibility over more sights, the data.

and that's where we can revisit our operating model to see how we can obtain that 10 x.

value

So as we get closer to the wrap up, I want to talk, uh, I talked about fostering the culture of innovation. I talk about revisiting, uh, reimagining the business model and revisiting the operating model.

and these companies examples that I made like perplexities or mid journeys.

or like esois where trains, they don't have better AI tools.

For them, the difference is like

rather than asking how I can increase the efficiency 10%.

They're thinking how I can change my organization for this new era. How I even can help the whole industry, how I can change the whole industry itself.

And when I think about that question,

that how our industry may change.

The first thing that comes to my mind is you.

In this new age of AI, I don't think you're just

executives running the company.

You're going to be a big changemaker, and that's why you're here. You're attending this conference because you're here to see how AI is going to change our industry and how it can bring more value to your employees, your organization, to clients, stakeholders.

You're like that

orchestrator

orchestration didn't work. You're like that orchestrator that trying to change the whole organization.

and eventually the whole industry with all things that is possible as a result of AI.

Thank you

Yes, you can still.

Any, any questions from the audience, we have Mike. OK, back there.

all the, all the way back.

And also another corner there.

Hi, uh thank you very much for this, uh, very exciting presentation. Um, my question, uh, is, uh, in your presentation and those

examples are, are large companies, but for, for example, in Finland or in EU, the most of the uh, for example, architecture firms, they are SMEs, uh, smaller than 50 or or even 20 people. So what do you see? Um, how AI could help those SMEs which are not really technology companies.

Great question and um

I had 45 minutes, so I didn't include some of those slides, but back to your question about the

majority of companies in our industry, they're small. Like, as we mentioned, 50 and I remember I had a call with an architecture firm that there were just 10 people.

They reached out and they wanted to see how they can have an AI strategy.

that can help them to stand out in the market.

Back to my point about like AI is enabling us to be mightier. These organizations are seeing value and want to see like how we power of AI they can do a similar work or maybe a smarter work with that amount of people, the small group that they have. And uh there are some companies even in the size of 100, 120 that they started hiring AI experts. The Were examples that I made, and there are some other examples that I can share public

ly but they, they're like, Weream is 800, but the other companies that are uh

mentioned like I can't mention their name, sorry, but they are 100 people, and now they have their own AI team at the company.

and they're trying to do experimentation, so the point here is changing. So these companies are partnering these AI experts with their domain experts.

so that they can do the work better and decrease that operation cost within the process, the project itself.

And your question has the second part, or and actually

but maybe if you take another questions they are on, on the corner.

Thank you, Sam

And that was a good question. Yeah, yeah, Dr. Sam, lovely, that was such amazing uh talk and very good energy. Thank you. My name is Christopher. Lovely to meet you. I'm curious because you're speaking, if you can imagine the AEC industry like a pyramid. You're speaking to the very top of the pyramid today. The bottom part

where the work is actually happening. Uh, that's what I'm most curious about. The true productivity challenge in our industry. And I was at a conference recently and I heard a mechanical or maybe it was electrical subcontractor talk about their use of AI and they said if it can tell my guys how to bend a pipe better.

than

talk to me about it. I'm kind of curious in your experience, beyond working with the tippy top. Have you worked?

where the work is actually happening.

I had a conversation before the session with uh Arnie, and he mentioned the report, their research, um, from

Anthropic. Thank you. And uh

the most uh

companies that are being impacted by AI is right now at least it's a firms.

and for them, there are many opportunities that they can look at how AI can help them with the work that they do. And if your question is about the construction site is

like a different, the physical world, like how, like you mentioned, um, bending the pipes or like even the like uh cutting the pipes and figuring out how many uh leftover pipes that I have in the project that I can use to in the new project that I have as a like a fabricator. So right now the AE firms are the ones that are most impacted with AI and for them some companies they see it as a race to bottom, but some they're looking at it as a new

opportunities and trying to reinvent themselves and what um my focus was here was

on those companies that they're trying to reinvent themselves like by looking at the culture and business model and also operating model itself.

Great, thanks. Let's give a lapsete and some very, very nice, and you will be here around these days. We'll be here around these days, so of course you can talk with her during the breaks and, and there's also a possibility to send messages through the event app, so surely you will ask. Thank you very much. And actually now we have uh so the coffee break, our sponsors partners will share for a few thoughts about their work. So first

we have the International Council for Research and Innovation in Building and Construction. I never remember this name. It's so long. So it's CIP for me. So whoop Kaiser.

My

Thank you very much

I hope it's

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

At the "AI in AEC 2026" event, Sam Zolfagharian delivered the keynote session, "Opening Session Keynote 1 - The Future of AEC Work in an AI-Driven Environment," addressing the profound impact of algorithmic intelligence on the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industry. Sam explored how companies are investing in AI tools, such as GPT licenses and AI agents, yet often fail to achieve ROI due to outdated systems designed for human limitations rather than AI capabilities.

Sam emphasized the transition from human intelligence to algorithmic intelligence, where AI analyzes vast datasets to provide actionable insights. She illustrated this with examples of AI tools revolutionizing proposal analysis, quantity takeoff, and code checking, reducing weeks of manual effort to minutes. Disruptions in other industries, such as Adobe being challenged by MidJourney and Google by Perplexity, highlight AI's ability to reshape business models. She also cited Uber's 250 AI models and the proliferation of self-driving cars in San Francisco as evidence of AI's transformative reach.

The session underscored the importance of fostering a culture of innovation, with examples like Citibank's AI champions and 3M's 15% innovation rule. Sam praised SSOE's proactive approach, combining training and experimentation to lead the industry in AI adoption. She highlighted how companies like Levi's, JCDouka, and Wetrim are leveraging AI for personalization, insights, and scaling expertise, showcasing AI's potential to create new value propositions and expand markets.

Sam urged attendees to rethink their business and operating models to fully embrace AI's transformative potential. She shared how AIG optimized risk analysis workflows and PepsiCo used digital twins to enhance factory layouts, demonstrating AI's ability to drive efficiency and innovation. He concluded by emphasizing that AI is not merely a tool for incremental improvement but a catalyst for organizational and industry-wide transformation, enabling smaller teams to achieve greater impact through intelligent collaboration. Sam left the audience with the challenge to become change-makers in this new era, leveraging AI to redefine the future of work in the AEC industry.

Speakers

SZ

Sam Zolfagharian

Co-Founder & Strategic Advisor

YegaTech

================================================================================
SESSION 3: Session 1: AI Implementation
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

We'll be looking at the full journey on AI implementation from high level strategy and leadership all the way to the on the ground stories.

Here's an outline of this session. First, we start with a broad public sector perspective. Our opening presentation offers a look at how 18 US State Departments of Transportation are joining forces to investigate and implementing AI solutions.

It's a perfect opening for the states. Highlighting the big picture of industry-wide collaboration for AI implementation.

Next, we get a shift to the sea suit level. The second talk brings a leadership-focused framework for AI transformation in AEC firms. The message here is clear. Technology alone doesn't create value. Leadership does.

Many firms dive into AI projects, but they often stall in the at the pilot stage because top management hasn't established the vision, governance and incentives to scale those efforts to combat the advantages.

Then, having covered the managerial we, we will explore the cultural transformation through employee-driven AI experimentation.

The comos message is that sustainable innovation often comes from ground up.

This story underscores that building an AR-friendly culture. One where people feel confident to learn experiment and even make mistakes, can dramatically accelerate adoption and make new technology through the sticks.

After that, we will address the change management for AI adoption.

Be especially, essentially how to turn resistance into resilience.

We know that in any co-organization introduction new technology can be disruptive. This presentation provides practical guidance to ensure that the adaptation of AI truly transforms our work processes rather than fading away after initial excitement.

Finally, we will cap off the season with a compelling real world case study of AI implementation in a partnership context. Not all expertise needs to be in-house. Finding strategic partners

on the AI journey helps you achieve your goals. The presentation will share insights into both the success achieved and the challenges faced during this transformation.

Each of these 5 presentation highlights they implement in AI is not just technical effort. It's a holistic challenge involving strategy, leadership, culture, and change. We will see that success, we will see that successful AI adaptation in AEC requires aligning people and or organizations at all levels. This session is about learning how to turn AI's promise into practice, how to move from excitement about AI to effective execution on the crowd.

I encourage you to listen to this shared ideas and consider how they might apply in your own organization. We have fantastic lineup of experts who will share their experience and lessons learned.

By the end of this session, I hope you will take away not only inspiration.

inspiration, not only inspiration but also practical insults and proven strategies for driving AI implementation in your daily work. Thank you. Let's get started with our first presentation on how state transportation agencies are turning forces to tackle AI.

And we have here in the floor we have, yes, and Uberry and Chef Seco, uh, yes, yes, a season and technology leader with a deep background in the transportation sector is currently a principal digital solution technologies at ANDP, and he has earlier served in keypo citizens at the Massachusets Department of Transportation and FFCer serves as HNDB's digital infrastructure solutions, national leadership team. He has more than 30 years of

experience in leading and delivering digital transformation in Niati. I think this could be very inspiring speech. Please, sir.

OK.

Thank you

All right. Uh, thanks and uh I've already introduced myself earlier, um, but really glad to be here. Um, and to bring this really great perspective from the United States. Uh, we're focused in transportation, um, our company, and so we're working with a lot of our transportation authorities throughout the country, and we're talking here mostly about state DOTs, um, and so,

if we go ahead and get click the slide next.

Um, a little bit about HNTV which I talked about earlier, so I'm gonna just go ahead and skip through that.

Oh, thank you

I was wondering

Thank you.

So a little bit about HNTV's approach, um, around AI, uh, a little bit more detail from what I talked about earlier. Uh, basically, we're trying to to develop um all of our employees, 7500 employees, and turn them into digital innovators. Um, and that's really our approach. And a lot of that approach we're turning turning into our consulting room. So we're helping a lot of our clients, mainly state DOTs take adoption of that culture of

innovation approach. Um, and you'll hear Jesse Newberry, my colleague, who has been working not only with one of the state DOTs before we hired them. Massachusetts EOT, but also working with many of them to help figure out how to, um, not only take advantage of the technology, but also take advantage of innovation, culture, and approach within their own organizations, realizing that the change management, the hewn piece of AI is probably even

more of the most challenging part of this transformation.

So within the state DOTs, um, we're talking about uh

Departments of Transportation that

in theory, should work together in the United States to, to foster mobility across the entire country. However, the realization is they are very unique organizations. And with that, within that structure, there are um multiple agencies or or industry associations that help our DOTs collaborate and also innovate together. And we've highlighted just a few of them here. So, um, TRB, which is probably the most internationally focused

organization, Transportation Research Board that many of you may have heard of. That is the organization that's really helping to do the research, but also funds a lot of the collaboration that happens. And actually Justin Newberry is going to be talking about this, um

this collaboration or this AI peer exchange that's happening across our DOTs, TRB is really the one helping to fund it, and also organizing it.

Along with that, we have our Asto, which is the American Association of Transportation officials. Uh, that is really where our executives of our DOTs collaborate a lot in helping to, to peer exchange, help to provide best practices. They run different conferences throughout um throughout the country, including GIS transportation, which is actually happening this week as well in Chicago. So a lot of uh great

um technical and also executive and change management type of um expertise happening amongst that. And then also ITS America, which is intelligent transportation Systems of America. Um, over the years has umbrella of ITS professionals, but as broadened to incorporate many different technology patterns as well, uh, which is now including AI data governance, um, data approaches, and

now even around culture of innovation, training, um, and resources for our DOTs in the in the in the United States. Um, they also have an international arm, um, ITS World Congress, which meets once a year, uh, internationally. Last year happened to be in the United States. Uh, but this becomes a really good

exchange of expertise, especially in transportation operational, um, so in our transportation management centers, um, looking at mobility strategies. And this is where, of course, AI has a large impact, um, and probably the closest impact to the traveler, uh, on our systems. But what we wanted to highlight today was really looking across the DOTs and how diverse it is, um, but yet, looking at all this level of adoption, and Jes

se Newberry has had the pleasure of of organizing these peer exchanges that have happened and um so I'm gonna ask Jessie to come up and talk about some of the findings from the most recent peer exchanges.

OK, hi everyone. Jesse Newberry with H&TB, formerly from Massachusetts Department of Transportation. Um, I think what's really interesting about these DOT uh AI focused peer exchanges.

was that we saw some themes emerge from them, and I'm happy to share that with you today. We saw honest conversations happening between all the different states that were involved, sharing what they're trying, sharing what's working, um, thinking about what feels messy, thinking about what feels unresolved, um, and a lot of the discussion was less about the shiny AI tools that are all out there. Um, we all see them, right, but more about practical things that bring success to a DOT, um, governance, workforce readiness, data

procurement

Green button to move forward

There we go. OK

Um, oops, I think I went too far.

Here we go.

Oh.

There we go. All right, that's better. So, um, there were two main peer exchanges in 2025. 1 was in San Diego, hosted by Caltrans. The other was in Boston, hosted by Mastot in partnership with Northeastern University. That is an important point that I'll make through this. Partnership with academia for DOTs is important, um, and I'll, I'll talk more about that in a little bit. The first exchange in um California was in January, early in the year, and there were about 10 states that came out for that.

The second one expanded to 14, so in total we have about 17 states represented, and you can see them on the map, um, geographically diverse across the US as well.

We thought it was good to do one on the West Coast, one on the east coast, our next one, I think, will be more centrally located. Um

what's interesting again is those, those constant themes that we, we heard through these. So governance, workforce, ethics, and security was a huge talking point of both data management, um, use cases, ROI, and even procurement challenges and innovations needed there.

Is it the other green button

OK, how far did I go

OK

OK, great. One of the um biggest takeaways was that governance really matters, right? So a lot of agencies are experimenting with AI, but no strategic framework around that. Um, things can get fragmented pretty quickly.

Texas and California, I think, are two really good examples of states that are taking this very seriously. Um, they are looking at a more structured approach through interviews with staff.

thinking about what works there, getting focus groups together and making use case inventories as well.

So the broader message was that states would benefit from some shared national perspective on this principles that will keep flexibility in how they implement AI tools on a local level.

The next big thing was data. Now we heard somebody say, I think shit in, shit out was the thing that we heard this morning. I agree with that. All the states agree with that.

You can't do anything with these AI tools without good data, and boy do DOTs have a treasure trove of data. I'll give you the example of Massachusetts Department of Transportation.

Uh, it's really 4 companies in one. So we have a rail and transit division. We have a registry of motor vehicles. We have an aeronautics division that handles all the local airports and then we have a highway division.

They all operate separately, but none of them like to talk about their data together. What a lost opportunity is to have an organization with 4 different companies with so much data about where people go, why they go, where their car is garaged, how they get to the airport. So, um, we look for opportunities to combine those data sets and of course AI is an amazing tool for that.

They talked about data quality, data pre pre preparation as a major barrier.

which makes sense, right? Because AI is only as good as the information behind it.

Uh, a lot of the conversation was talked about, uh, you know, breaking down silos, thinking about common standards, improving quality control, treating data work not just as governance but really as part of your AI readiness as well.

Then we got into the workforce, and this is really an interesting topic.

So the best tools don't go far without the people and skills that are able to use them, right? And um

this is a huge challenge at DOTs where the the the workforce is aging out and all that institutional knowledge can leave with them, right? So if we don't have tools to help capture that and help um sort of

give that to the next generation of workers coming into the workforce. There's trouble. Um, so states talked a lot about shortages and how to acquire talent. They talked about challenges even creating the right technical roles in a government structure. There's a lot of union activity in the US and the DOT. It is very tough to get a job description changed. So that was a huge point of conversation. Um, we also talked about, you know

how much to build internally versus what to buy from vendors. There's a, there's a balance act that's needed there.

Um, so there's some examples that we're encouraging mass thought, for instance, partnered up with that Northeastern University crew and did some upskilling and um hiring, so they kind of combined the two. How can we have an internship pipeline coming in from all of our great Boston area universities into a DOT and then for the folks that want to stay around, how do we keep them involved in the work that's going on at the DOT and help them start on their career path.

Um, Texas started seeing strong training adoptions. That's something that they've they've taken very seriously about how to train up the workforce. And then, uh, there's an organization, Innovate US. They're a nonprofit, and they offer free AI training for government staff in particular. So there's a lot of states in the US that are taking advantage of that as well.

Procurement, um, actually I was having a conversation just a few minutes ago with somebody before the session about

how they think procurement is very difficult in Europe.

I think it's next to impossible in the US.

So, you know, there's an old model in government, these long procurements to take like 6 to 12 months to get a product in place and in the AI world that is just not going to work. This is moving so quickly and in 6 months, boy, that piece of technology could be completely obsolete and you have something else new and you've bought the wrong thing already, um, by the time it gets into your workforce. So agencies are starting to experiment with things like low cost pilots, um, sandbox environments.

expedited tracks, ways to go from a pilot to adoption without starting over.

Um, they're also putting more structure and risk through assessments, um, procurement reviews and frameworks like NIST, um, National Institute of Standards and Technologies, um.

So there's a clear role on human oversight and transparency in a procurement as well.

So there's, there's much to do there to reform procurement in the US, I would say.

Then we look at use cases and ROI. So, um, go figure, if you take time to build an ROI and present that to your executives, you will get better adoption.

Um

showing some value

um to your executives is important. Um, a great example of this is a Masdot's computer vision sidewalk review work.

so that cut schedule and cost significantly, and it was like tangible. They could see it right away.

Um that got them more buy-in on more additional AI projects as well.

Texas DOT found that doing an ROI analysis with their executives at the table would bring a better support for more AI initiatives as well, and they were actually the first state in the US to publish an AI strategic plan.

which is, I think it was published in the middle of last year, and they've just since revamped it about December, January time frame. Other states are taking notice of that and basically copying what they did and you're just making it their own.

So path forward.

um, I think when you look at what's going on here across all of this, the message is that not every DOT is going to try to do the same thing. They don't have to. Um, they can move faster and more confidently if they build shared learning together.

shared frameworks, shared tools, shared experiences with those tools.

Um, so this is a transition point for DOTs from lessons learned into what the next national steps may be.

And one of the greatest outputs, I think, from these peer exchanges, these two that we've had is um

a general line of thinking that we should do a pooled fund.

Um, a pooled fun study in the US is, is, is going to give you the ability to do some really amazing things, getting DOTs together, paying for their travel, paying for speakers.

Um, it's a, it's a real important first step to um helping all these DOTs kind of navigate this together. So New Jersey was nice enough to step up and sponsor this and make the first investment

Um, the target goal was 300K in the US. I looked the other day before I came out here. It's already up to $1.1 million. That's from all the states contributing funds together.

So the idea of this is to keep the states connected, support additional peer exchanges, um, build the strategic framework, create shared resources like repositories, training resources, uh, governance tools, and what I like most about this approach is that it supports coordination without forcing every state to do the same thing individually. It's better off if we work together.

Looking ahead

um, we see a lot of momentum here. Um, when agencies were asked where they want to be in 12 months. None of them said they wanted to stay the same. I think that's pretty obvious. Um, the priorities were consistent governance

better data foundations

more workforce readiness.

ways to share tools, training, and lessons learned. I think it's easy to use those pooled funds to be able to pull that off.

Um, fragmented process is not sustainable. National coordination is going to matter if agencies want to move from pilots into real capability and real AI projects.

So when closing

um

I'll close with the idea that this is a pretty active and ongoing conversation that's happening in the US between the states.

We already have 17 states involved. I love making states jealous of the states that actually attended the peer exchanges. There's a lot of FOMO. Um, they all want to do the next one. I think that's probably gonna happen in the later half of this year. Like I said, probably a more central US location.

Um

partnerships matter

No one agency has to figure this out all on their own.

Um, sharing what works and sharing what doesn't, more importantly, and what can be reused is probably the fastest way to advance AI

um, in government transportation, I feel.

Um, so as the chair of one of the TRB committees, the Data Systems and Governance Committee. My charge for you all here um is

I give you a personal invite to come participate. Um, we love an international audience

We love to hear about research. We love to hear about new things that are going on.

Um, less than, lessons learned, I'd love to share that with the USDOTs. So, um, happy to connect you and would love to have you participate in that process as well.

That's it

Do we, do we have any questions in the audience?

Yeah

Anyone one back there.

What's their hand up? Yeah, OK, great.

Well, I, I work for the Deutsch Department of Infrastructure. We only have one department. We're a tiny country, uh, I found a lot of inspiration in your story and also a lot of things I connected with. And one of the things I was wondering about is, uh, as a government, we have a lot of responsibility and so we often go to the human in the loop process to like have part AI part human, but we also know that a lot of the real benefits come from automation and actually giving away the work out of the hands of humans to

uh the AIR models. So I was wondering, do you have any real world examples of how that balance is being found in the US.

Yeah, human in the loop is so important in all of this, and actually we spent a lot of time talking at the DOTs about that particular issue.

Um, the way I like to talk to folks about this is, it's your partner, it can help you, um, in lots of different things in your job, and you may have some engineer that comes in and thinks they know about AI and then they sit down with the business user and actually find out about what they really do in their day to day for their job. And uh that can be real eye-opening. Um, the second that you

give them a tool that they realize is going to help and they have that light bulb moment of my goodness, this is going to save me a ton of time and energy and effort, and then they think about all the other things that they do, especially as a DOT employee where you are literally overwhelmed with the amount of work that needs to happen in your state. Um, they have that aha moment.

and they see what could, what's possible, and then they understand it.

But it takes a lot of time and effort and energy to get to that point with that person individually to help them with that. I just think that's so important to do anyway.

Great, thank you. Actually, there are many questions, but if you are an introvert, please use Etta if you are extrovert face to face meeting with these guys, keep a la. Thank you.

Hey

So next we have Max Leander talking about the CEOs a playbook. Max is see Technology Officer at our Inciner owner and author of the company's AI strategy. He has background in structural engineering, and he also holds a degree in Stras leadership. And at least I believe what he will say, and I try to follow in my best waylicker is there.

All right, exciting to be, be here and, and thanks Wea for introducing me. So I'm next gonna um walk you through this, uh, uh, CEO's playbook for AI implementation, which is really a 5. framework for getting it right, and I think it kind of builds on some of the, the, uh, things said in also the opening speech to this event, so I think

you will find uh common themes here.

So let's start off by uh saying where I'm from, I'm from I group. I think Mattis did a good job of presenting the company. I can say a few words about myself and maybe also to why I've written or compiled this CEO's playbook.

I have worked quite a lot with company boards with executive teams and I see from time to time over that uh it's not, it's not easy to get things right on the leadership level, and if we look at kind of the problems that we're seeing, um, we can say that a lot of companies are

adopting AI.

and, and I think we all agree that AI is really changing white collar work. That's, that's given

but uh only a fraction of the company's report that they have the CEO overseeing that the governance and kind of the AI implementation.

and yet, as we've said already previously here on stage that, that we are actually, we're doing like a systemic change here. We are not just adding technology. We are reshaping how the company works, what the company offers, uh, and hence, it is important to have

also the whole sea suit and the whole leadership team supporting on their own.

um risk areas of responsibilities in order to make this systemic change.

So I see a lot of companies, uh, a lot of CEOs and executives that I talked to, they are struggling with this, how to kind of exit this pilot mode.

and how to really get uh gains that are stacking up and, and prove the bottom line, um, results of the company.

So here's the five steps. Let's start with, I think the most important one, the strategic intent. If you don't know, if you don't have a strategy and and how kind of AI uh will tie into your strategy.

uh, then I think you're set for, for failure. So you need to be clear with why are we implementing AI in our company. What's the purpose of AI? What's the purpose of the change that ties together to the bigger

strategic framing of the company.

Uh.

and, and that will help you also to exit kind of this uh more like opportunistic pilot seeking for just interesting scattered experiments.

um

and then you should, of course, you should put the same measures on, on the, the changes that you see from the strategic changes. So, you know, use your standard KPIs for measuring the change.

and um I think also here it's important to link strongly to the human strategy, the HR strategy, people strategy, you know, who are you hiring? What kind of skills do you require in, in your different um uh

roles in the company

And I think this is emphasized in the uh um AE companies were essentially the

the value comes from the the capabilities that our experts have.

OK, so you should uh set up the strategic intent uh, then of course I think going further from that, you start to, you have to, you know, divide uh the ownership. You can't one single person or or let's say uh function in the company cannot own everything AI related, so.

I think it's important that we, you, you structure the, the

ownership into these layers that you have in your company, and they, of course, they might vary according to company size, etc. but that you establish a clear uh governance and ownership.

where you can take decisions on each governance level.

and you should, of course

uh extend this uh ownership down to the PFL owner so to the business units that you're measuring to see, see the actual uh

bottom line impact

And I think from a model point of view, uh, this, uh, network of AI champions.

was already mentioned. So I think that's really a good framework for doing, doing this change. So, you know, having a central kind of enablement, uh enablement team, but then pushing out the ownership to the organization. It's a really good model and tying that with funding you can really kind of turbocharge.

implementation

OK, uh, then you're getting into some tech, OK, so what's, what's, you know, what do we want to buy, what do we want to, uh

build ourselves. I think this is a really important question, and again, the answer is company specific. There's not, you know, generic answer to that, this, but there's a, I think a good methodology for uh finding your answer.

and that is that you should uh build your advantage on your own data. So what's kind of core and where you create value as a company. That's where you should invest in your

own bespoke solutions and when you have like more these commodity layers. That's where you should buy because often you can buy this technology a lot cheaper than what you can develop it yourself and it also frees up your, let's say, capacity to focus on, on your bespoke and value adding technology.

So focus, you know, your own talent on, on your own um solutions and, and just simply procure the rest.

Um

yeah, so again, I think here it's not about how much tech you have developed, that's something that we engineers like to brag about, but it's more about what can you actually, how much can you move the needle with what you have, have as a.

complete system

All right, uh, moving on to, uh, timing. Uh, I think here in the previous, uh, presentation, uh, was, was this was also mentioned that we need to keep a good pace here, and I think to some degree we are still in

uh, in, in the beginning of how AI will actually transform companies that in some cases actually speed might be more important than getting everything, absolutely right.

So how I think is the best way to go about it is to have this small uh minimum viable solutions or products that you can ship rather in weeks than than quarters.

and have this tight loops so you iterate and you refund, uh, you invest more in those um capabilities that

that you can say that they are, are giving the results that you are looking for. They are giving the bottom line.

Um, impact.

And I think for AEC, uh, what's also important with timing is that since the projects are typically long, um, and, and the kind of the general pace is, is in this long

um cycles. It's, it's really important to just, you know, move up the curve to, to start collecting the, the learnings, not only the technology, but the learnings.

So I think blade movers will have a really difficult time in a few years to catch up.

OK, so closing in with the 5th point here.

I like to think about the like the initiative portfolio to change management portfolio like uh maybe like an investment portfolio. So, so of course you need to have a focus and the focus comes from the strategy. It comes from what you have kind of set as your priority. So obviously you should go hard on that, um.

but uh

uh also mix in kind of a few bold options. Uh, I'm going to show some examples how we have utilized this playbook and maybe elaborate a bit on that. Uh, but, but really, uh, you need to do both things that are providing value right now and to the next quarter, but also build this foundation for this more like systemic change. So I, I like to have those two.

elements, uh, present.

uh, and again, it makes sense to cluster things. So even if you have like a maybe a broader focus, you can for one year or for a half year, you can cluster things that you do. So you actually build kind of on top of existing

things or things that you have built previously. And then again, this gives like turbocharges, the, the pace that you can um create new capability.

So the clustering is a good tool here.

Um, and then you can look at, at the funding. So like, like I said previously, you should double down on, on what it's working and I think you have to accept also uh as in in an investment portfolio. You have to accept the fact that not every, uh, every initiative, not every work package will be a um uh a win, and you have to do kind of a stop loss and get rid of what

underperforms sun. It can also be a matter of, of just having that paused.

for a bit and, and returning to, to this.

So, um, summarizing the five factors that will

make or break the AI implementation. You have the strategy, you have the ownership

you have uh the right mix of bought technology with bespoke built technology.

You, you have a good uh cycle time. You have a good pace of innovation.

and you have a, have this kind of grouping clustering, and you have a good focus and a few like other ones that just might be like really revolutionizing uh how you work as a company.

Uh, now I'm gonna, uh, elaborate a bit, uh, on this kind of

um 5 points and to give you some concrete examples of how we have utilized.

this playbook in, in our company.

So

uh, starting off with the kind of strategy layer. So we

released our strategy, AI strategy in uh late uh 24 and it was together with a wider uh strategy update. So this meant that we have now been able to

incorporate uh changes that, that kind of are.

needed for AI adoption also into HR or people strategy.

and to, to the products and the offerings. So we are working not only with AI and technology, but also how, how do we enable our people to.

to make this transition and how does our product, uh, what we are actually selling to our clients, how is that changing?

Um, we have, um, this AI program has the company board overseeing, uh, the, the program, so they are uh kept on, on track with what we are doing for the next half year and we're, we have a good

uh follow up for that with KPIs that are are reported monthly.

We have, of course, the, the company board and the C level uh all invested in them change.

Uh, then we have the champions Network or this hub and spoke where we have um

representatives from each PNL department.

uh driving change on a, on a grassroots level.

Uh, I don't know, yeah, on the differentiation or the kind of where to get that technology, uh, yes, we have built quite a lot of these bespoke uh like AI corporate AI solutions.

but uh we, we are simultaneously also shifting the uh software, the applications that we buy to kind of

find applications that are suitable for our overall AI strategy. So, so in many cases it's also about changing the applications that we own and use in the, in the daily operations.

and uh also the bespoke solutions that we have built. We are using uh libraries and

components that are uh made previously or by other companies. So it's all you can also mix that bot technology in your bespoke, uh

solutions

OK, so then on the cycle time, I think here we are, are actually walking the talk, so we, we aim to do the uh do this uh fast, minimum viable solutions or products.

um

and when we, when we have the target audience, we, we bring them on as early as possible and, and try to ship the, the solution as fast as possible.

And then by collecting data, we make the decision if we want to.

um, invest more in that capability and to, to ramp up

Uh, also, I think how to get more cycle time is, is that you, you want to, uh, you want to play both like uh uh top down but also bottom up. So from top down you want to push this horizontal.

capabilities like corporate capabilities, but from bottom up you want to enable the

uh our experts to build their like mini bespoke solutions and you want a democratize the data for building this, so that's why we are also training.

our staff or a portion of our staff too.

on this low code platforms.

And yeah, then on the uh portfolio, uh, I think most of this has already been described, but maybe, maybe one pick could be that we, we always try to include in every

uh half-year plan, we, uh,

we have one like risky bet in there. So we try some odd technology or we have a, maybe a, a bit uh um

optimistic take on, on something that we want to just test out and see how how could this kind of um move us forward and it, it's sometimes it's also about collecting those learnings. So sometimes the most valuable thing that you can get is actually knowing what doesn't does not work and you can also build on that experience.

So, what I'm saying here is that uh strong leadership is needed, you know, across the sea level in the companies. That's how you get bottom line. Impact.

and uh you get that impact by distributing the ownership

and creating

targets on, on its, each level.

Uh, you need to own your data. You need to build your bespoke solutions on ER value creation where you have the most

uh value, um, and, um, you need to have a good pace.

and um

and in general be systematic with how you approach building the the capabilities.

and

yeah, so building this synergetic portfolios will absolutely outperform this just going into, to pilot after pilot.

And yeah, that's

my take on it.

If, if there's some quick question we can take it one quick question here.

Uh

and other questions through event up or meeting Max.

Uh, thank you. Uh, so I have one question about uh employees and uh

what do you see if you want like a wider range of employees working for 50% of their work on AI or you have like prefer a smaller team with like 100% working on AI.

I think actually the most effective way of bringing AI is by bringing it kind of behind the scenes. So you necessarily the end user doesn't really know they are using AI. They just get solutions that get the job done.

and are intuitive to use. I think that's as a single strategy, the best way to deliver AI to, to the people and the organization.

Right, so thank you. Thank you, thank you much and

and now we get nice combo of skills on the states. Please come. So there's Nissan Barto, architects and commuters and designer who's the comparison industrial PhD then we have Akanrace, toolmaker who plants architecture and technology and Eliana and Nyereitital focuses on driving digital transformation and and Maxmen in Potomapa, I think you are discussing a lot about it.

Thank you

Hello everyone, Is this on?

Can everyone see my screen

Thank you for this invitation and a wonderful event and thank you for choosing to being in the, in the right session. Uh, we're here to talk about AI culture, and I want to thank Sam for bringing up culture in the opening presentation. Uh, we are here

representing Henning Larsen. It's a kind of a global office based in Denmark. We work in over 30 countries since the kind of late 50s, we have over 650 employees, and we are a really interesting case for AI adoption because we work across different like a big spectrum of different um uh

what's it called fields, uh, architecture, landscape, urbanism. We also do interior. We also do lighting. Um, and our guiding principles are sustainability and circularity, design excellence, research and data

You don't really see here, you know, value for customers. It's also another kind of interesting aspect of architecture being ac company but not only a company.

Uh, so I'm Nitzan. I'm doing a PhD research on AI within architecture and urban design, and I'm also in my background an architect.

and I was tasked in Henning Glassen to understand how do we even tackle this idea of AI? How do we even approach it? When I arrived, he was like, listen, we need some AI. We don't really know how, um, and the first thing that kind of happens in a lot of European companies is we look for governance. We look for, OK, we want to use AI. What are the rules? What are the guardrails? And quite quickly we understood that the way that we want to approach it is not through governance, but it's through culture.

But why culture

uh as opposed to governance, there's many reasons I'm optimistic to try and squeeze all of them into this presentation, but one of them is that there's a lot of aspects about using AI that are not governable because the real conversation is not about AI. It's about the use of data and how we use data, how we utilize data, how we kind of um talk about data to justify some of the decisions that we're making are not something that you can govern.

Uh, we talk a lot about data-driven design, but when data is actually driving the design, is it something that we even want and to what extent, again, all of those things are much more relying on the culture that we developed around data rather than the kind of guardrails and guidelines.

One example of this is AI is based on a training.

of data sets. And we use a lot of non-empirical language in architecture. We use a lot of ambiguous and kind of interpretable language, but if we ask a data-driven mechanism to make a beautiful building, we're much more likely to get something like this than we are to get something like this. Uh, and this is a data-driven uh situation. And it just to show that data-driven is not necessarily always the right thing that we want to do, and the choice again is a cultural one.

Another one is this idea of working with statistics, if we were to be a statistics-based industry, we would probably not design any handicap ramps because statistically there's not enough people on wheelchair to justify the effort and time and money that is being put on this, but we are not just designing for the majority. We're designing for everybody.

Um, another thing is this idea of accountability. We will always be accountable for our own actions on foreign own output. We can never move the accountability into AI and therefore governance around AI is not necessarily something that should be the driving force of adoption.

Um

our approach at Henning Glassen for AI, we also have principles like the previous presentation. We don't want AI to be locked in an ivory tower. We don't have a small department of AI experts that kind of do all the AI work, learn, take all the AI tasks, develop all the AI capabilities, but we're looking at a collective learning, uh, bottom up, upscaling approach where all of the employees in the company are part of this AI transition.

Uh, like I mentioned, this horizontal and vertical adoption horizontal is what everyone in the company can do with AI. Eliana is going to extend on this a little bit, and the vertical is the actual kind of edge cases the champions of AI who are looking to push the boundaries of what AI can do for us.

Uh, on the horizontal aspect, we actually let all of our employees at Henninglasen try out existing AI tools

as much as they want, and then evaluate how much did this benefit your work, how valuable was this for you? Um, how useful, how effective. We gathered all this data and we actually found existing tools that are very, very good for us directly. These are some of the tools that we're using. You can take a photo of this. We also have our own kind of propriety, um, RAM GPT. We're part of the Ramble Group. Maybe there's some people here from Rambo.

Um, and another interesting thing is that aside from using the tools we're actually teaming up with some industry leaders. You're going to hear about this a little bit in the future, but we're developing this strategic partnership with Kre around AI visualization.

Uh, and this is the one that you want to take a photo of. These are four principles for AI adoption. We work with literacy, transparency, agency, and accountability.

Literacy means that we don't teach people how to use AI. We actually don't think it's a very valuable thing to teach people what prompt to use and what program to use. We teach people what AI is. We teach them about mechanics of LLM. We teach them about fundamentals of machine learning, and when they get to understand what the technology is, they become comfortable with trying it out, and they also try the right technology for the right problems.

I would love to elaborate on this more. We don't have enough time. Transparency means that we're always open about the use of AI internally and externally. When you don't have a culture of transparency, people use AI without telling that they've used AI. We don't have the internal tools to evaluate something properly. If I don't know if AI was used or not used and also developing this alignment with clients and collaborators about what AI was used for and why.

Agency is an interesting thing, and Ashghan is going to elaborate on this a little bit further. Um, agencies about how much agency do we maintain on our own thing? Of course we can automate things. We can hand over to AI. A lot of the tasks that we do, but we lose touch with our project, and in architecture, specifically as opposed to other sectors, there is an importance of me being actually hands on on the project rather than just optimizing and automating everything to deliver value and speed.

And then of course accountability is more of a mindset. Whatever we produce is on us.

Um, we cannot just hand over accountability to AI.

Eliana

will show you how we actually do it in the office. Let's see which one is the right green, not this one. The big one. This one perfect. So very nice being with you today. Emilian, head of digital adoption at Annie Larsson. So let's see how we use AI at our company. Do we write a prompt and they get a project out of it. Obviously not architecture is extremely complex. We cannot get the OK cake at once, but

AI can help us with all the small slices that make us move faster. Obviously, like everyone in the room, we use AI for day to day tasks. So everyday productivity with co-pilots, writing emails, scheduling meetings. We have as Niton said, our internal chat GPT called RAMGPT, but we do things that are much more meaningful, I believe one of the most interesting aspects of AI is definitely communication. So

AI uses a natural language that means that already early on with our clients with the stakeholders, we can talk and that means that from a dialogue we can get already a visual direction. It means that already by talking we know in which direction we should point and we can explore more and more without 3D modeling, without texturing, without wasting time. We already know where we want to go together, um,

and while doing this, there is something magical happening because definitely we uh end up also being inspired by AI, so it can be also a wonderful way to uh ideate uh architecture and then turn it into reality like this beautiful pavilion in Milan, and the architecture is mostly about the life within it and a space we know it as designers can be many things, can be um an exhibition

space, can be a disco.

If it comes to, yes, or it can be a dining space and definitely have different moods and atmospheres. Anyhow it can help us to simulate all of that without spending too much time, and that also inspires our clients to understand what is the usage, what is the future that this space can have, and it's especially interesting when we look at our disciplines like landscape like

doing renderings of vegetation is very, very complex, and AI is definitely opening up new opportunities for this sector, and one thing that I love is the fact that we can also simulate the environmental risks like flooding scenarios, so people reacted differently when they see what the risks are could be, and we can bring this conversations early on again really quickly so we can move in a more meaningful

direction and AI obviously as all of us said, it's great with data like um

many people we bring all the reports, regulations together, and we use notebukele to chat with the eye, understand if we are moving towards the right direction, we can structure all of that, and we can also investigate and brainstorm with AI again in which direction it makes sense to go. And this applies also in other discipline like in this case, the database was the planting given by the client or the local architect, so real things.

that can turn into the perfect planting palette, and we do more than that because we can then um

also show it to the clients. So it's always a combination of different tools that we use. In this case, the person in a notice as we said is bottom up approach. This is not an AI expert. He's a designer, so they are working in rabbit and just by having something simple, simple with some colors, then they can present something very attractive. So even in the construction phase, things can be engaging, can tell a story, disconnects to the

visual expression. AI is so strong into helping us to tell again the stories of the future, and we can do that in many different ways. We can produce sketches that are coherent with our visual identity, with our brand, but we can also make it coherent to the project so we can customize it and through notes and to the specific workflows. In this case it's rea. We can also make sure that we can make it effectively during

the project. And if you don't like sketches, we do wooden diagrams a lot. We love that because you don't commit to a specific material or to detailing, and if you are on the other side of the spectrum and you want to get a high quality, you can do that because you can add a lot of detailing. You can make it as good as the rendering companies just starting from a simpler render, and you can make it location specific, combining it with some images from Google Earth.

and we also love the fact that you really adapts to people, so you can sketch on top and add the new features. You can start from anything you want, even something white. That's why we test our facades. We test materiality already in AI, and there are obviously also new opportunities opening, just moving from a sketch to a rough 3D model. So really AI is helping us to do what we already do

in a much better way, in a more significant way, and it can also open the door to new things, and Ashghani is going to speak a little bit about it.

The big green. OK, hello, my name is Ashkha and I'm happy to be here.

Um, I'm, I was going to talk about more about this vertical approach in our office, uh, I'm sitting with our development department. We are carrying a lot of tools. Um

and

uh, I'm coming from uh architecture background, and I know this story is very important in architecture.

Um, and this is basically story of the story. uh, we figure out if we can tell a story about how we develop tools, uh, in a correct way, and you can find 1 to 1 comparison with the what I'm working day to day to actually design jobs.

Uh, so in this analogy, you can imagine that you have a challenge in this story. Uh, this could be in my case, finding out how the best environmental analysis analysis tool is or our recent projects, how we can bring the, the biogenic materials to the public and so on. But um this challenge is defined in architecture in our case, in, in, in development, uh environment as well.

Uh, and this is how we kind of map them as a like a challenge. And then what we want to this logic based on the story, because all of this agency and also all of this agenttic design is based on what agent does for you and how much access you go to. Like, I don't want to talk about the, the technical point and how much I'm excited about.

uh tool chains and, and skills and MD files and so on, but you can imagine in your head if you're already familiar with it and if you're not, just catch me after this. Uh, but basically what, what, what's we start doing and developing the tools is just how we can separate the concern through the narrative. What are the areas that we can get some of our uh digital agents and some of our actual people agents coming into this areas and we can separate them and collect them in one place.

which we can uh create a logic and then within that uh workforces from actual people which I'm talking about, uh, I'm gonna talk about a little bit more. Uh, we figure out how to have a breakthrough. We find a solution like it's a digital solution that it also reflects exactly on how we come up with the elect design with a great mobility, with a, a great material to choose, uh, with a breakthrough how, how we will with the, uh, low-carbon material, uh, things like this.

uh, which is

pretty big in Denmark

And now I'm, uh, I'm, uh, not going to only talk about uh digital agents, but also human agents. Uh, we are very lucky in, in our office that I'm, I'm very lucky in, in our office that I get to work with, uh, very talented people with different expertise. Uh, we have, uh, few industrial pasties that are contributing a lot to the knowledge base. We have great colleagues working in like in different areas from wood construction from, from being management, from

uh landscape design, urban design, and we cannot really create this uh omniscient like entity that does everything for you, but we can bring those, those people with their knowledge and into this ecosystem of tools. That's what, what, what we're doing creating these tools where if you create a tool that requires knowledge from noise simulation, let's say, or material.

choices and and new material and innovations. They're bringing those people into this environment, not, not only um

not only having all of this agenic tools and LLMs and all these new tools, our co-work and so on, helping you with that, but these are the actual people that create this agentic design that agencies is falling onto uh actual people with the, with the knowledge and that that makes it uh like a good story and narrative or within our company, which we are really want to keep the narrative inside of our company, uh, because we tell good stories basically.

So, just to wrap up our conversation, what is the actual impact of this approach that we're taking at Henning Larsen. Well, the first thing that we see very, very clearly is a cultural shift. We see people in the last year transitioning completely into being very open about talking about AI, being very curious about AI, experimenting, calling the colleagues, hey, look, I've tried this thing here. Do you want to see it as well? Do you want to try that one as well? The shift is very, very clear throughout the entire company, not just in our office in Copenhagen.

And just to kind of exemplify this, we've started this AI chat on teams, and we all know how, what's the motivation to join more AI chats on teams, but we actually have half of the company who voluntarily joined this chat and are constantly sharing with each other, I've tried this, this thing or this thing doesn't work. Oh, there's this new model. What do you guys think about that? We're also seeing people starting to develop some of what we call new skills. People get comfortable with prompting. People get comfortable with modeling for AI visual

ization which has slightly different characteristics and also finding out themselves what are those new ways of modeling? What are those new ways of communicating? What are those new ways of feeling comfortable with an AI environment without, you know, kind of copy paste templates of prompts into specific things. And also, of course, we're starting to gather this data, but it's very, very clear that people who use AI for specific tasks are kind of across the board saying this is saving me between 70% and 80% of the time. This is by far increasing the quality of

everything that I'm producing because they're choosing the right tasks for the right tools, um

and there's also money savings that we're starting to see. There's going to be a little bit of time where we have more specific data on this, but this is very clear that there's going to be a huge shift. And the biggest thing is, I would say that everyone kind of understands that we're not about just kind of learning AI, getting that knowledge, putting it in the box, and then going on to, now we work with AI. AI is developing in a pace that requires a never ending journey of learning like learning constantly is the goal. There is no endpoint for this, at least in the foreseeable future.

Um, and this is the kind of main thing I think that we can take from this. So, um, I would like to thank you very much for listening. I really invite you to connect to us on LinkedIn. We're all very approachable people or find us in this conference and one personal request, I saw a lot of phones up. If you took any good photos, please send them to us. We would like to share and capitalize on your photography skills. Um, I think we have time for some questions.

So there was a lot, thank you, a lot of energy on the floor, so surely I think there are a lot of questions, but there are 3 of you and you can distribute around the conference area. It's easier to crap you, so please

meet this girls and guys, thank you very much. It's a very pleasure to hear.

OK, then change management issue. 0974 AI in practice. Eric Stromberg has built an international pinting while also serving on the AA strategy team in his role as team manager at ALP Lightning designs. So we go overseas again. Another continent. Welcome.

It's the clicker. Yeah, OK.

in button.

Hi everyone, can you hear me

All right

Let's jump straight in and talk about relevance, and I want to make this personable, personal for a moment. Some of you might have seen I was slightly limping when I got up the stage here. I had a minor hip surgery just a month ago. Um, I know you're all thinking like you're way too young for that, that we can talk about it in the coffee break.

Everybody gets a little bit uneasy when they see an X-ray, even if you trust the doctor, even if you're staying calm, just brain starts scanning for meaning without actually having uh that expertise.

So these are my pre-surgery X-rays.

I started them and honestly, I couldn't tell which, you know, which side am I looking at? What's the, what's the problem here?

So after my, my appointment, I felt that familiar feeling of worry and relief.

Uh, you meet with a doctor, you get your thirty-second summary. You you ask a couple of questions.

and then you go back home and you realize you have to more questions, right.

I think you're all know where this is going. Of course, I uploaded my X-rays to an AI chatbot and asked without any more context. Do you see any abnormalities here?

It actually gave me a clear explanation of, uh, that aligned with my doctor told me.

Not as a replacement, but as a reinforcement.

It helped me

take some of that fear out of the situation and gave me a language to think with.

In that moment mattered to me. My doctor did the diagnosis and the plan.

and AI was the partner

that helped me process it in my own pace.

And it gave me insights beyond my expertise in terms I could understand exact moment I needed it.

And of course I, of course, called my doctor afterwards and asked for a partial refund.

But this is relevant, so we'll come back to that.

not to leave anyone hanging, this was the little bump on my femur head that had to be removed. Super hard to see with the untrained eye.

Before we continue

my name is Eric Stromberg.

I'm an

associate director and bank manager at HDB Lighting Design. I'm an electrical engineer and been an automation nerd by accident.

And these days I spend most of my time helping design teams figure out how to use new technology in in ways to make it better and not more complicated.

I don't come from the perspective of having all the answers.

I come from, have tried a lot of things, broken a lot of workflows and learned a lot from very smart people.

And today I'm excited to share some of those lessons.

HDB lighting design is the world's largest, um, women-owned independent architectural lighting design firm.

founded in 1968, or bringing over 50 years of expertise.

in how people experience the built environments.

With 10 studios across North America, Middle East, and emerging and growing in Europe.

and nearly 200 professionals serving 20 market sectors.

Our services integrates architectural lighting design, sustainability,

visualization, and custom product development.

Most of our industry, sorry, key insights. So throughout this presentation, I'm going to touch upon these three key insights. So I hope you all bring home these 3 K sights from, from this talk.

Uh, urgency comes from relevance, not fear.

Pilots don't scale, recipes do.

and giving ownership, not tasks.

So most of our industry shares these three traits, right? We're knowledge-based, we're very proud of our craft, and we move very, very fast.

Nothing really threatens a professional identity if someone else says that they can do the same amounts of tasks and

um faster and with less stress and better results.

Let's say, let's do a parallel to adjacent industry.

Let's say there's a carpenter who's been using this hammer for the last 20 years, and then comes this new guy with a shiny screwdriver. We all know what's gonna happen, right? The new guy's gonna show off.

and the experienced person's probably gonna feel that, you know, a little bit of worry of getting replaced. I'm gonna hold on to that hammer very, very hard.

Over time, they'll probably meet and the new guy will learn how to use a hammer and the experienced guy will incorporate the screwdriver, but the time it takes for them to meet.

uh can look very different

So when we introduce AI using fear

would trigger a lot of resistance.

So during our boarding sessions of co-pilots early last year.

after going through the Gen AI fundamentals of compliance, structured data.

and reverse engineering. I showed the team this image

to little tester. Raise your hand if you think this is AI generated.

One

2

3

4, OK. Um, and also like I brought down a resolution to make this a little bit harder. So I asked our team

do you think this is AI generated, and dancers were like 50/50, which I presumed.

um, but what was amazing was the

responses and engagement when I asked why they thought either, right? I'm talking to lighting designers.

uh, and they started to argue passionately. Um, and that's when I realized this urgency that doesn't come from fear, it comes from relevance. So finding that relevance, let's say someone who thought this was

uh real could say there's a great balance between the daylight and the internal lighting, uh, the casting a light on the structured surface in the back looks legit and the fixtures looks nice and centered.

Great conversations. And also this was generated by co-pilot.

So the real leadership question isn't how do you roll out AI? It's how do we help each person?

hold on to that pride they already have. We talked about this earlier. Um, so tuning in to the like the messaging of

not being too quiet, you'll be ignored, and not too loud because it will cause resistance and people will push back.

The leaders who succeed are the ones who can tune the message to the specific craft.

I don't know, most people have probably seen this study, so a recent MIT affiliated study shows that 95% of organizations across all industries are not showing any

uh, measurable return

All 5% are extracting meaningful value.

So if AI feels frustrating, you're not behind, you're pretty normal. Uh, the most recent, the recent most firms are stuck, uh, is not a lack of ambition and intelligence. We got that, a lot of that in this room, for example. It's because we've been running pilots as

uh events focusing on tasks, instead of designing new systems and new process end to end.

And pilots prove something can work, but a recipe can make sure it works again with different people.

different products and different data.

When we started our pilots in early 2024.

uh, we thought we were being smart. We wanted something scalable, something easy to measure and intuitive. So we created this pilot workflow. We've probably seen something like this before, identifying the task, prepare the data, develop the prompts, execute the task, evaluate and then document.

What we didn't understand was that these steps does not carry equal weights.

In reality

data preparation dominates everything.

not the tools, not the prompts, data.

AI redness turned out to be less about intelligence and more about organization.

Let me give you a concrete example.

I think someone shared a similar image previously. I went to look for the best proposals, um, for my best projects, um, proposals sounds like that first good AI task, right? It's high effort, repeatable and time-consuming.

And this was one of our folders, right? Um

so should I rely on the latest modified dates? Should I, you know, reach out to the p.m., etc. So we made a deliberate decision to not pursue

uh proposals as one of our first AI tasks, not because AI couldn't do it, because we weren't ready.

So understanding that and as many of you already know, collection of qualitative data is one of the biggest tasks to both start with and manage over time.

During our pilots, let's take a look at the key metrics we used.

I tried to put myself in the shoes of, you know, someone sitting on the board

um

and I've, I'm asked to put more money into this initiative. What do I need to know?

So we allow on these three key metrics that most, most executives can understand, time, effort, and quality, and are dealt between non-AI and AI assisted.

And these metrics were easy to measure, easy to communicate, and specifically easy to revisit.

not just in the end of the pilot, but also later on as these tools evolved, which we all know they do, um.

So as development sped up.

We now have this 4th measure.

value alignments

This is not a nice to have. We talked about culture previously. Speed without value introduces a lot of risk

as an example for us, integrity, which is one of our core values at HOB means that agentic AI can never be the sole decision maker and uh finding new talents, for example.

So, whatever you buy tools or build them internally or a mix of the two, sticking to a repeatable recipe for evaluation of what keeps progress from turning into chaos.

And here's the interesting part. When you look at these metrics, they should feel familiar, right?

Because this is how you partially evaluate someone before you hire them.

Experience, knowledge, attention to detail.

and if they're a good cultural fits.

So as we move towards this, you know, era of autonomous agents, AI stops being a tool you use occasionally.

Uh

and something that looks like a colic or teamy manage.

And if you think about if you hired 50 new employees, you wouldn't just give them tasks, right? You would redesign management, training, review, and accountability.

Speaking about accountability, let's talk about ownership.

Um, so with traditional leadership style,

giving tasks, you often get compliance, but if you try to give ownership, uh, you can get stewardship.

Since this is moving so fast, we wanted to make sure that we enabled these fast iterations that we mentioned previously, turning those or working on this into entrepreneurs.

with predefined boundaries and knowledge of our air policy. We gave them enough wiggle room for individual experimentation.

uh, together with frequent updates.

During our firm wide onboardings of co-pilot, for example, we told everyone that you are now a supervisor.

This new tool is you know your new colleague.

What they produce, you are responsible for.

Let's talk about our AI champions. Um

our guiding coalition.

We defined this role by letting them know that they are responsible to communicate updates from the strategic team, back to their studios, but also from the studios back to the team of other AI champions.

So they're not, they're representing a group of people, not just themselves.

Um

and our AI studio, uh, studio champions and not just prompt writers. They are

feedback loops

If you don't have an AI champions group yet. This is my recommendation for this bottom.

They are volunteers, mostly. They speak about the pros and the cons, very important.

And also they protect others from pitfalls.

I know this is a lot of texts. Uh, I want to give you all the slide to just take back home. So from my experience implementing new software and processes for a while now, um, together with the research I've done, especially now in the AA era.

I'm now going to go through what a potential organizational structure could look like for a successful future with AI.

We'll start with the executive sponsor.

someone in the in the C-suite position or management.

This person understands risk

reputation, and long-term firm health.

The right-hand side, the AI council.

minimum one person from each department. We want to include every department we have.

and try to keep this group small, like max 10 people.

They should prioritize processes, not the tools.

And these individuals are also willing to be unpopular short term.

And lastly, here in the middle, it's deliberately placed in the middle, um, because it's the most important and most misunderstood.

Um, Tyler doesn't matter here. It could be AI transformational lead, head of AI enablement or digital change lead. What matters is authority and clarity.

This person should wake up thinking, why are pilots not turning into habits?

and what needs documentation upskilling, or training.

The experience profile of this person.

should be hybrid, both technical and operational.

We should be deeply trusted internally.

and the process thinker first technologist second.

And if this person has to ask for permission for everything. The role is just decorative. If they can make decisions, it's transformative

So, the sponsor sets the Y.

The council sets the whats and the adoption owner figures out the hell.

Let's summarize our key insights.

So make it meaningful for the people doing the work by tuning into that relevance.

Um, make it repeatable. So the next team can succeed.

by investing in a system for evaluation.

and empower your teams so they can help carry this torch by giving ownership.

The leadership again is not being the person with all the answers is making sure that it's easier for others to win.

To wrap things up

If you were to approve the next year's budgets.

Um, and we have two options there. One is for more AI tools and the other one is better adoption systems. What do you think would move

return on investment faster

Most firms would probably say A right now most, you know, want more AI tools, but through what we've learned

uh, and that knowing that it's not quite here. Um, approved adoption systems are rare, and A comes with less meetings, which is why it's tempting, but probably not the best strategic choice.

because just like the X-ray, the breakthrough was not the technology existed. It was knowing when and how to use it.

And with that, I want to thank you all for listening.

Thank you. Thank you. Any questions from the audience?

while you are waiting, uh, what do you think, uh, what, what role does leadership play in sustaining momentum after the initial excitement of AI Billot fates. How do you keep adoption efforts from stalling?

I think it's again time back to the AI champions and having the AI champions, uh, engage in, in their, the people they talk to and having that chain of communication between the strategic group down to the actual people doing the work and coming with, you know, updates, frequent updates instead of, let's say major updates. Again, we want to make sure we enable this fast iteration of communication.

Thanks. So if you have some more questions, meet, meet him later and thank you for sharing even your medical details, everything. Thank you. So we are well informed. Thank you very much. It was very interesting.

And now to the last part of our uh session. Uh, so here we have yakin Arakena who helps companies scale the engineering capabilities through integrated beam-based AA enabler, digital design, and both A1, Steinwahen Abrecht iros, co-founders of Magade Melab. So we have here is kind of n combo of two companies working together. So something interesting in that sense that you don't have to have everything in-house skills, please guys.

thank you for being here. That session before lunch, so we'll keep it quick. Um, we're going to talk about what we did, the good, the bad, and the ugly. And first thing, it's nice to see other firms sharing the same problems. So that's, I'm at the right conference. So my name is Joina from Projectos. I'm a partner and I'm here with Abel Embrecht from Academia, and we're going to talk about um

uh what we did together. So it's, we've been doing it in the past year and we're, we're, we're here to share some insights, um, so Prios were a multidisciplined design firm, just about 100 people. So it's, I guess, a small mid-size depend the market, um, we're based in Uruguay and we work in the Americas, and we're smart enough, we're engineers and architects. We're smart enough to know that we couldn't do AI by ourselves, so LinkedIn, just looking at the network, I found these two

gentlemen, now friends who are from academia, so just go ahead and introduce yourself. Hi, Juan. We're in academia. My name's Abel. This is Brecht. Um, we are awacombinator backed startup. We are focused on, yeah, speeding up engineering deliverables of engineering firms mainly focused on industrial infrastructure of which practice is a great example.

Yeah. So, um, let's just share the story. Um, so, go ahead, Abel, what we did, then I'm going to talk about the business insights as a manager, then they're going to go back to the little technical details, so go ahead. Yeah, so we've been working with practice, uh, about a year now. Uh, we've implemented and deployed 4 different workflows. Uh, first one is quality assurance checks on technical documentation that is on isometrics, for example, checking whether you design files are in compliance with

your basis of design. Uh, second one is a popular one, of course, chat with technical standards, make it, uh, making it really easy to just navigate all this uh

complex technical documentation. A third one is RFQ vendor comparison. So there's a lot of vendors, uh, a lot of files need to be compared really quickly. We do that with AI so that the engineers get a really nice overview. And then third is really getting into the details with um a software that practice uses, which is Plan 3D. And so we made these small automations to automate repetitive workflows, um, that can be anything from spooling, uh, tagging

um, to also doing quality assurance right into the design software.

But the guy, uh, the people that don't know, um, AI agents are systems that can read unstructured or technical documents and use existing tools such as how to get and um Excel for example.

In a really uh high-level overview, uh, this is a platform very simple. We take in your technical documents, your tools that you already use that your engineers are already using, uh, in the design phase, create this uh custom workflows with custom UIs depending on how the firm itself operates, and then, yeah, the end goal is really to get your engineering deliverables faster. It can be um QA reports or, or more, uh, yeah, detailed design, deliverables.

Yeah, so let's talk about the problem we're trying to solve. So what's, what's our day to day look like? Um, we're doing integrated design, so all disciplines together in house, um, each discipline thinks they're very important. They want their space and they want their the priority and their bI model, um.

Each of the disciplines has their own sort of recipe. um, and on sort of tools and they, they, they, they're responsible for um

their deliverables, and you can't tell them exactly how to do it because, you know, they're engineers. You can't tell engineers exactly what to do. Um, and we, we go through the whole life cycle. So we're in the beginning, designing, then you have to buy stuff, and then when it's built, you have to make sure it's commissioned and it accomplishes its achievements, and we're looking at AI through the whole life cycle, not just the design stage, which would be like the easy um bow hanging fruit. Um, and yeah, mistakes are very expensive. You all know that if you

re building something, you can kill somebody. If there's a mistake and you can't say, oh, my new AI agent apparently made a mistake. So error checking is really important, and if it's wrong on the BIM model, OK, you can change it, but if it's wrong in real life, that's, that's very dangerous. So that's sort of something that's always present risk management in this, and I think that's been mentioned in the previous chats. Um, and every project, and every project manager and every engineering designer thinks this

project is different

So it's hard to standardize. It's not as easy as saying, hey, just why don't you use an agent? Every, this project is different. It's the client is special and everybody who's been around them duringing design has heard something like that before.

Um

so yeah, um, what we did is we took, we took a look at 8 workflows. We deployed 4. We have 54 users and 24 repeat users. So yeah, we'd like that 24 to go up, um, but this is how it's been since we started, and let's just, let me just share some details, um, some insights of what's worked and what has not and the results. OK, so number one, don't automate chaos.

So we had like 6

piping design processes.

We found out when we said, OK, let's get an agent to do piping design. How are we doing it? 6.

And we're not that big of a company. We, I think we have 30 piping designers, but we have 6 different processes.

We found out when we wanted to go to the agent.

So we got a big benefit just to mapping out our processes. That was a lot of the benefit I'm going to share now. Um, an error detection is part of the design process. You can't just say just produce something. It's produce and how do you make sure there's not a mistake. Um,

the actual piping engineers are the ones designing the agent with our friends because they're responsible for the result, so you can't give a chef

a tool and say

please make sure you have, you use it. They're not, they're not going to use it. Um, and adoption is the hardest part. It's very easy to say, I want an agent. Please do it. Then you need to get other people, that's been said also. OK, this one was the hardest business case first. In the beginning, we were like, oh, I can do that. Let's do it.

because it can

and technology is wonderful. And then after a while we're like, hm, we're doing this every once every 4 years. Does that make sense? So, so then we had, we had to figure out what criteria to use to evaluate, um, and then this is the big one. Get ready to change your pricing strategy. If you're selling ours, this is destroying effort

It's a tricky situation

Um, but the benefits have been there, so this is a graph the past

8 years at Projectos in 2017, um,

sals in Blue, billable hours in red and Ibida or prophet in orange.

and we had been growing in the past years, but always selling more hours.

right?

And

last year

was the first year we, we sold more with less hours.

We didn't fire anybody

We just spent more hours working with our friends and our agents.

So now what do we sell

We sell, we're we're not selling ours anymore. Sometimes we are because the client says you have to give me ours. Um, but a lot of times we're selling results

That's a big

culture shift, uh, for us, for our clients, for our people.

but the results are there. And, and this is not just because of 4 agents.

It's because we got so worried that hey, AI is going to destroy our efforts. Let's start taking projects to fixed price.

And as we did that, we got better results.

OK, what do people think about it? So this is um

this represents 80% of our design team, um.

at 1 to 5

um, productivity gains, pretty strong.

Um

risk assessment

As a manager, I'm really worried about this. Is there a risk in my delivery and the perceived risk is mostly not. So this is actually very worrying to me.

If my engineers are not perceiving risk.

I, I would, I would have liked some more on the yes side.

So this is something we need to work on.

Um

am I concerned I'm gonna get fired. Um, OK, 14%. This is the first year we're tracking it, so let's see what happens. Um, I think what the engineers have realized is that if they don't go to AI, they might get fired, not if they go to AI.

Um, and just to wrap up what our people think, what are they using it for? This was surprising to us. Learning and research, so we work across different industries. We'll do an oil and gas project, semiconductor, pulp and paper. They all have different standards on your piping.

like how far your supports are, um, really quickly you can get

piping engineers, electrical engineers, into new areas very quickly, and that's what, that's that use case represents. So that was surprising to us, really interesting.

Um, yeah, now let's, let's head to the technical insights. Yeah, thanks.

Um

so yeah, in the past year, we've had some technical insights that we learned developing these agents as four categories that we want to uh check, and that is creating trust, handling quality and noise, uh, co-designing with engineers and driving adoption.

So first and foremost, creating trust. Everyone knows Al Alam's hallucinate and yeah, we really tried to design the product in a way where it's uh enables trust from the engineers.

two examples there, uh, fairly straightforward. First one is citations, always to source materials. If you indicate an error in an isometric drawing, for example, obviously point to it, or if you um find no errors also show the area that has been investigated. Um, and then transparency through reasoning traces. We always want to be very transparent of what the agent does, how it works, so that the engineer can actually validate whether it's thinking correctly.

And then quality and noise, uh, one of the problems with the eye is it generates a lot of output. Um, if we, for example, do a quick QA check, then it's um can give you 50 to 80 points that they checked and how can you let engineers actually go through this very quickly? How do you speed them up and not slow them down. Um, another lesson there is always built on the state of the art models, um, when we started working with Projectos, that was back in the Gemini 2.5 days. Now we're at Termini 3.

2 The performance increase, especially in construction, is, is really visible. So if you build a lot of companies are building their own custom systems. If you build customs systems, build them around the state of the art models because they'll improve with the models, which is great for the future.

And then also, uh, to ensure quality, um, a lot of companies have great SOPs, great of um, yeah, great standard procedures for, for example, checking drawings or generating other reports that are already used by interns, um, if you enable this knowledge to be used by the agents that helps a lot with performance as well. And then again, like designing the UX, um, so that it's easy, um, for reviewing. So we make a lot of custom interfaces for you. And let me just say something. I think this was like the

4th version of the because our, our, our project managers wanted to tender comparison and like I don't like it, do something else. Give me something. I'm showing it to my client. My client doesn't like it. It's too complex. Um, so as the actual users and our clients giving us feedback to the technical team.

and for sure in a few months, this will be different.

So that's, that's part of the reason we, we said this is changing too fast. We need somebody dedicated to this, and that's one of the reasons for the partnership.

So what you're seeing is not the first iteration. A lot of lessons learned in there.

Yeah, yeah. Practice has been great with giving this feedback and, and really getting the, the in-depth expertise. Also like we have this platform that actually like as an overview of all the workflows, but we see these companies, they use like custom GPTs, their own internal AI tools, uh, so we try to integrate it to actually have a, have a central platform that gives access to all of this, and then on the next slide, you will see the, the Aca plan integration we see the adoption is actually much higher when you integrate directly with the tools

that they were using, and they don't need to do like a PDF export of an isometric they want to check, but just do it directly in the tool they're using when you don't have human in the loop, the changes are automatically applied to the, to the software uh where the source code is, uh, is located.

Yeah, yeah, we find that really working inside the software plantre in this case, uh working inside of the software that your engineers already works, um.

provides more value than having to use another tool again. And then, yeah, as Brett mentioned too, like small improvements as well for adoption is, um, easily exporting reports, so making it easy to share within the organization and uh yeah, sharing the resources in one library.

And then lastly, as Joaquin said, like having some engineers from the organization that you're working with from the firm and really having a close collaboration is is best. We found that the most used, uh, use cases come from, um, yeah, an engineer that we work with closely, um, and that's a really valuable for collecting feedback, improving the, the product over version 1 to 4.

Um.

Yeah, we found if somebody's the one proposing the idea, the percentage of adoption is going to be much greater.

than if, hey, Mr. Electrical engineer, I have an idea for you. And like, how many

electrical design projects have you done? 0, OK, then let me do my work. So sometimes you have to sort of suggest

Yeah, I think that's it. Um, if you have any questions, we'd love to answer them, and otherwise always we'd love to chat outside.

Any questions from the audience back there?

I in the middle part of the room.

they are challenging still. Oh, this is the hard part. So thank you so much for very good presentation.

Uh, what I wonder with you, you mentioned that you're using Gemini, it's basic state of the art model, but how do you see that you have very deep domain expertise, how you do bridge the gap within this very deep domain expertise with the general model that you employ.

I think that's for you. Yeah. So the question is how do you bridge the gap between deep domain expertise and yeah. So this is the, the valuable part. Um, so all companies have really have their own set of internal knowledge, which isn't even available to the state of the art LLMs because it's often behind closed doors, and that's uh the opportunity for all the firms as the models get better, if you have these deep domain knowledge, um, in actual files can be SOPs, it can be other data formats that becomes

really valuable because, um, yeah, you get treated as an intern. uh DCI models becoming smart interns really rapidly. Um, but yeah, you can use your deep domain knowledge if it's available in, in, for example, yeah, a PDF or any other formats.

Also like the design process is so complex. Like we build it, uh, we break it down into different building blocks than we do evaluations on each and every building block in order to create a confidence that's needed to, to bring something to the engineer to actually have their, their, uh, verification.

Great. There was also another question.

Hi, thank you. So actually, uh, that

part that you mentioned about user experience, UX design really resonate with what I'm doing now. And I wondered the timeline and the duration for you to take from the first version of your design to the 4th version that you mentioned. And how did you apply those diverse expectations because it's kind of, I think

not

that much really applicable to apply all those expectations from diverse, you know, team people. So how did you do that? And can you say that this force version is the exactly what they're looking for, or it's gonna never ending journey. OK, let me answer this one. Thank you for the question. Um, yes, it's, uh, so yeah, it's the never ending journey answer. and

we're more worried about getting quick iterations like what everybody else has said, and this is the interesting part. Most of our design team is in, in, in Uruguay, and it's been most you guys in Silicon Valley and Europe, just remote work. Um, so this is the first time we're meeting in person. This is really, really interesting part, right? And it's worked. So, so we say to the engineer, tell them whatever you want.

but don't expect it to be exactly what you want, but just get it out there and give feedback.

And so we're more worried about going agile and getting feedback, but we're, what we're, we're most worried about is making sure it adds value to our claims.

not what our engineer thinks. Is its solving a problem to our clients?

That's what we're most worried about. Um, so yeah, that's, that's, you don't want to get out just two engineers talking all day, iterating something and not about the clients.

So the client has to be present. What's the value to them? Yeah.

But it's not easy and you have to do quick, be as quick as you can.

Any other questions? I think you are, these, these are screening is creating a great presentation. I think he was in good track in your company. Thank you. No, no, not only pushing there pull or already inside the company and that looks really interesting thing is that um

our average age is like 26.

Um, so we're

we used to be the infrastructure design that uses technology and now we're like a technology company that does infrastructure design, and any 24, 25 or 26 year old, like it used to be BIM.

Now it's AI with BIM

and they're all about that. And that, that makes it easier. So it's not the same for every, every firm, yeah.

And it might be that you find some clients here, so you never know. That's great, yeah, they're wonderful. So we have lunch on the first floor, just go down and 11 pM we carry on. Thank you very much.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "AI Implementation" session at AI in AEC 2026 brought together industry leaders to explore the transformative role of artificial intelligence in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC). Featuring speakers such as Brecht Pierreux, Ashkan Rezaee, Nitsan Bartov, Erik Stroemberg, Max Levander, Jeff Siegel, Vesa Järvinen, Joaquin Arocena, Abel Van Steenweghen, Eliana Nigro, and Jesse Nyberg, the session delved into strategy, leadership, culture, and partnerships. The opening presentation showcased collaboration among 18 U.S. state DOTs, supported by TRB, AASHTO, and ITS America, with Jesse Nyberg sharing findings from peer exchanges hosted by Caltrans and MassDOT. Key themes included governance, workforce readiness, ethics, security, data management, and procurement challenges, exemplified by Texas DOT’s AI strategic plan and Massachusetts DOT’s integration of data across its four divisions.

Max Levander outlined a CEO playbook for AI transformation, emphasizing strategic intent, ownership, timing, and portfolio management. Henning Larsen’s approach combined horizontal and vertical adoption, cultural principles like literacy, transparency, agency, and accountability, and tools such as RAM GPT. Partnerships, including CREA for AI visualization, enhanced adoption efforts, while employee-driven experimentation fostered innovation. Erik Stroemberg highlighted change management at HLP Lighting Design, focusing on metrics like time, effort, quality, and value alignment, supported by AI champions and organizational structures. Copilot-generated lighting designs illustrated practical applications, blending creativity and efficiency.

Proyectos and Macadamia Labs demonstrated AI integration in engineering workflows, deploying solutions for quality assurance, vendor comparison, and technical documentation. Metrics revealed 54 users and 24 repeat users, with Proyectos transitioning from selling hours to fixed pricing models. Engineers co-designed workflows, ensuring trust and usability, while UX iterations refined tools like vendor comparison platforms. Plant 3D integration enabled direct QA checks, streamlining processes and reducing errors. The session underscored the importance of continuous learning, collaboration, and adaptation in leveraging AI’s potential to reshape the AEC industry.

Speakers

AV

Abel Van Steenweghen

-

Macadamia

AR

Ashkan Rezaee

-

Henning Larsen

BP

Brecht Pierreux

-

Macadamia

EN

Eliana Nigro

-

Henning Larsen

ES

Erik Stroemberg

-

HLB Lighting Design

JS

Jeff Siegel

-

HNTB

JN

Jesse Nyberg

-

HNTB

JA

Joaquin Arocena

-

Proyectos Engineering

ML

Max Levander

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

NB

Nitsan Bartov

-

Henning Larsen

VJ

Vesa Järvinen

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

================================================================================
SESSION 4: Session 2: Demos
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

of this two day summit.

and there was this study that was called State of AI.

in Business 2025, and there was this headline 95% of organizations are not turning their AI investments into an actual boy.

If you delve deeper than the actual headline.

then you also had other contrast to it, and that was that already 90% of people within your organizations are using LLMs or AI to complete specific tasks or to do their work.

So, what can we learn from that? Yeah, AI is everywhere, right? I also already within our organizations, but we very, very often do not see the actual business value or return on investment.

Now we're just starting with 2026. I think many of you also follow Davos.

and one of the main outcomes from there or one of the Prami goals set for 2026, I think it's clear we need to turn the isolated use cases that we are running into something scalable and into something that we actually can see the return on investment from it.

So I'm very, very excited today, um, to have, yeah, great speakers across the globe, also across different industries. We're going to walk us alongside the use cases or we call them demos that they have worked on during the last years, and I hope we get some inspiration from that how we can go back to all organizations and turn these actually through our.

So I introduced the first speaker, it's Alexei from Sweko and the presentation is called Integration of AI in Daily structural design. So, yeah, welcome, Alexei to the speak.

Thank you everyone. Yep, I see the micro is working. Let me first check

Yes, the screen works. Thank you, everyone. My name is Alexi and I'm a project engineer at Structural Steel Design and also AI ambassador Ezbeko, Finland OU, and today I will be talking on how we can implement and integrate AI into the daily workflow of a typical engineer.

So what do I mean when I say daily? I mean that I'd like me and my colleagues to benefit from it literally every day. And unfortunately, a lot of uh AI solutions available are text-oriented or text-based, and there is actually not that much of a text routine in for me or my colleagues all the day we are basically pushing buttons in a professional software where like copping, moving, mirroring, dragging, trimming, and so on, and it would be nice if AI could push the buttons for us.

and luckily it can via those tool calls which is in a simplified explanation when we ask AI to respond in a specific format and then we use our software to parse the output and make changes on our computer based on the content of the response. So if we could have those tools connected to the software we use every day, and this is exactly what I did.

I took a professional software which in this case being Autodesk robot structural analysis, coded some tools for it, made a small chat interface and connected it all to AI, and that's what I'd like to demonstrate to you today, which means we will also have some annoying screen screeches between the presentation and the demo, but this is a demo session, so I insist it needs to be some live action. So what you can see on the screen is

let me catch the mouse. This is the software itself that Autodesk robot, and this is my chat assistant. So and this allows us to, for example, select this nice steel truss

and ask AI to do something with it.

and I will copy paste the prompts to save some time.

I will ask AI to make this rust a little bit steeper, like to change its slope a little bit, and due to the nature of AI, the response time is about, I don't know, half a minute, and for the presentation it will be a little bit awkward, so I will sometimes just base the prompt and then come back to the slides and keep explaining the slides while it thinks because it basically spells out the output token by token, so it needs some time, and I guess it's needless to say that I'm a structural engineer. This is not a desk robot. Oh.

sorry.

And it seemed like, yeah, it has some network connection issues like it is supposed to happen during demo.

Yes, it worked during the.

yeah

See my

wife I went off.

Don't worry, I reserved some time for possible technical issues, so we'll still be able to fit the presentation.

Let's see, connection.

Maybe I'll just restart it.

since it kinda just connect tobacco that work.

OK, I will reserve maybe 30 extra seconds and if it doesn't work, we will unfortunately have to stick with the gifts that I carefully inserted into the presentation.

Let's hope it works.

Yes, I managed to

make it work. Even though I was there a bit in advance. All right, so let's do that once again. This is a truss.

and

I'd like to

make it a little bit steeper.

and once again, as I told, it basically spells the solution token by token. The response time is 30 seconds to 1 minute. I got

it's hilarious

Yeah, but I still would like to show some demo before we can switch to home.

due to the time. Mm, yeah, I think let's try to save some time. Terribly sorry about that. I

maybe one more

I

uh.

took me so much time to rehearse it with demos. I don't want that efforts to be futile.

No, my connection was failed. Right, let's stick to the presentation then.

Unbelievable

Yes

right, it just cannot connect to our internal network. Let's then stick with the PowerPoint presentations. It basically has all the examples I anyway plan to demonstrate available as gifts. So as you can see, a user can uh can send some text prompts and so on, and the AI actually modifies the model that the user has opened. Let me check how much time I lost on that, and I will speed up a little bit. Let's start on

the positive stuff. Um, excellent performance, this kind of applications perform very well on data analysis. All the questions like find me all where they excel at. And the reason is in the structure of those large language models, you see they have what we call an attention layer, which I can in a very simplified manner explain if you send it a bunch of tokens in context. It evaluates how important every token is, and then just

squashes them into a single summary based on their importance, which will contain that summary like 10% of token 1, 5% token 2, and so on. So when you ask, um, so when you ask questions like find me all where you are basically asking AI to go through the contest and highlight important tokens which she already gave to it. That's why it's so good to them. It's basically the attention layer doing its job.

Then these kinds of applications also work excellently when we speak of generating some kind of content from scratch. Once again, the answer is in the nature of LLMs during the training process they saw very long sequences of tokens where every subsequent token it kind of made sense when comparing to the summary of the previous tokens and its weights were adjusted so that it can produce similar sequences of tokens, and that's why it performs very well.

It can, I was planning to show how it generates a big steel hole completely from scratch, but unfortunately we'll have to stick with the gifts.

Then I will also going to speak a little bit about the challenges we might face, but there's an important disclaimer because this is a very rapidly developing area and new models are being published like literally every month and it might be so that when you do similar stuff, you may not face the problems I'm going to talk about just because you use neurological language models, but believe me, it was like very different, even half a year ago, so this is more of a historical debrief that I'm going to talk about.

Uh, the challenges in AI are normally when the output does not match what we would like it to be. So in other words, just hallucinations. I myself have managed to face two kinds of hallucinations, and I'm going to talk about them both. And the first one is what I call task understanding, which is completely wrong, but first I'd like you to take a look at the problem. We had a building with 1234.

56 load bearing frames and I wanted to convert it into a building with 5 load bearing frames but with the same length. So just space them a little bit further apart, and I asked AI to do that, and as you can see it understood the geometry basically, but then it started to hallucinate and create those um intermediate bars, which is something we never do. And the reason why I did so is

very trivial because those large language models they are trained on the internet and a small set of instruction problems afterwards, and there is not that much engineering on the internet. It's mostly pictures of cats like a little bit of coding maybe, yeah, so they were literally fed the contest and their weights were just so that the next token is like what they saw during the training, and if during the training it didn't receive very much engineering contact, context, you're basically out of luck.

but if we still want this kind of tasks to be done with AI. We have a very trivial solutions. If the weights cannot trigger the required output from our context. We need to change the context, so to say it simply, we need to take this complicated problem and split it into a set of basic tasks like copy, move, create, delete, and so on. So after I typed instead of convert this building to a 5 frame building.

find me all load bearing frames. There should be 6 of them. So basically find me all where it's very good at this. Then delete the first frame, delete, then move the rest once so that

the length is like it was before the modification and it performed extremely well because it can very easily understand those find, move, copy, create, and so on.

Then another type of hallucinations is a messed up output when no matter what you ask, the model basically messes up your software and even with trivial questions, it doesn't seem spark overall. It just, I don't know, completely wrecks the model and thinks it's done a good job.

I believe the reason for this is in the overloaded context. I mean, you may not exceed the allowed token numbers in context, but the quality still matters because

as you remember in the attention letter, all the context, all your tokens, they get squashed into a single weighted summary, no matter how many you send, and if you are context has a lot of unimportant tokens. They will be assigned very low importance like 0.1, but 100 of 0.01 tokens is actually one. So if you have very many unimportant tokens that summary is very dirty, and I made a small experiment.

I took a tiny large language model, a local one, and I asked it to draw me a triangle and with simple prompts it performed very well. It output me the points I needed, as you can see in here, but then I did the same request, but I passed a couple of pages of very useful info about geometrical shapes coordinate systems, and so on, and the context became so dirty that it sometimes I'll put like 2 points or even 4 points. It was very difficult for

it to see what's necessary to be done.

And the solution once again trivial, you need to clean the contexts because imagine you don't need to expose like thousands of tools. You don't need no, no need to send the manual for the program you're working at. Just imagine you have like your system prompt, then all your tools, then kind of format instructions, other instructions, and some gu at the end there is a couple of tokens of the questions from the user, and when this all gets squashed, it's very hard for the model to see what the user asks.

It all becomes about those Jason outputs and so on, but the content of that output is completely messed up, and that's what makes that model rex even for a simple questions.

In conclusion, I hope I haven't exceeded the time due to the technical problems. If you have something, I'll maybe try once again. But anyway, to benefit from AI in engineering, no matter who you are, are you a structural designer, and architect, but as long as you spend your day pressing buttons and you have a package to be sent on Friday. You need to do this, and there's jobs for everyone, for your developers that write plugins for a software. They need to code tools for the softwares that you use and connect them to AI.

Your AI ambassadors or basically person's responsible for the integration of AI need to educate the colleagues about this kind of applications because for many noncoders, AI is pretty much of a black box. Thank you, social media, they don't really help in that question. And for the colleagues, I think they need to stay open minded and be ready to change the way they work, uh, just like we did on the internet came in early 2000s, which I guess also

back then pretty much seemed like magic, and if you do it correctly, even with these tinies assistants, uh, the time savings you get like Dr. Sim was asking this morning, where are the savings? The savings are here even with these tinny assistants, uh, depending on how much you actually use them, you can get from 1 to 4 days per month per employee of savings, and if you scale it to, for example, a 500 people division.

then I did some math, even if 20 or 30% of employees use this kind of tools. The number of savings in hours may be like thousands of hours from 4 to 10,000 of hours, and that's a decent project instructural steel design.

So

that was pretty much from me, although a little bit less than I expected. If you have any questions, I'd be glad to have a discussion. Depends actually if we have the time because they're completely lost. So first of all, thank you so much. Big applause for Alexei.

If you'd like, I can try once again. Let's see if it Alex, you're trying, I'll just put it on the try and feel free to ask the questions, and I think we, we see like the complexity also of like the full stack at the end of the day, or is it to bringing these prototypes then actually to life and scale it later to all the divisions. That's exactly what we wanted to touch up on today. I already thought I was a, a raised hand over there. Do I pass my? No, we have a microphone. Perfect. So first come first serve.

Excellent presentation. I think that that's a very practical use of large language models in design, but I'm curious, could you have done the same with copy and paste?

Uh, what do you mean by copy and paste? Control C. No, because I'm speaking of modifications and immun control C control V like during daytime work.

I do not believe it's possible because I basically aiming to solve these kinds of problems when you have a project, you have a structure, you did a good job, and then the customer wants to, let's say, extend the building a little bit like a couple of meters, and if you do it manually in, for example, a finite element method software is select the wall, you move it, you notice that the notes, they don't follow. I mean the connected ones. It's a lot of manual modeling. Copy and paste is one you basically generate stuff and need

to repeat it. I'm mostly targeting modifications, and we do a lot of modifications and detailing you, for example, first model it in a very simplified way and during the detailed phase you need to do plenty of modifications. I mean, the drawings that go to construction sites, they originate from models, and those models are very detailed. You need to go through many plates, many beams, and so on. Move the stuff, and sure it doesn't collide with each other, sometimes pass

something around a column and so on and clicking that manually is

actually very tedious and not that fast with a stopwatch, I determined the time savings to be 5 to 10 minutes per request depending on how complex it is, and

thank you for the explanation, Alexi, and I think there's a great follow-up question also in the chat due to the time, I can only ask one more question. I really want to also give a questionnaire to the audience remote.

um, because when we talk about this, it's possible also with copy paste. Um, I think something that could show the value of this prototype. Is it actually being used already within Sveco? So do you have there some adoption? this is our this year's target. It was released during testing phase. Some of the guys tried it. I know that at least one person uses it because it's been released for production, and this year goes for SEO, at least for our business unit is to

introduce this work way to our colleagues. This was only one program. We have several of those in use, and by the end of the year we'd like our colleagues to be aware and start adopting this workflow. Fantastic. Thank you so much, Alexi, and I think that's exactly bridges what we said at the very beginning. Take the metrics, go back next year, um, I did not understood your name, uh, Christopher. Yeah. So tell Christopher the numbers, uh, how many people have used it, how much time did they saved, and then we can

compare it against copy paste. So thank you so much, Alexei, one more applause.

Thank you very much. And excuse me

I have one laptop to throw out of the window for bad performance.

Good. And everyone else was.

everyone else was three questions, you will find Alexi outside during a coffee breaks and lunch breaks, of course, so yeah, please, please have a chat and maybe see the prototype, uh, working later. So now we have the second group. Uh, the topic is about learning AI assistant for product selection in construction from data to decision. Um, so it's to the stage now, Rasmus and Gecko will they see you.

We downsized to one person, uh, you have your AI agent next to you. So the stage is yours.

Good luck.

OK. Hey, I'm Geroniemi from Cronold. I work as a product management on the new data stuff we are working on and today we are talking about AI agents and specific about the construction phase and how to select products and one of the key, key features of this and usually there's a certain flow

when selection products and usually it's get get gets done again and again. So how could we address it and make it a flow that we could reuse and all the things we have learned during the workflow. How could we store those and use those in a later projects.

as a quick slide. I go the slides quite quickly because there's lots, lots of demo stuff coming up but uh.

just quick starts about and these are actually what all starts where we have more people now working off, but this is not the main point, so let's go forward. And this is the agenda today, like what we are doing now and what the product selection dilemma. Nowadays and what what's that problem with the data and a little bit about how the demo is done, so we have to talk

a little bit about the skills human skills and then the ages and skills how how they compare to each other.

and then those demosele section.

So we have a own data platform and this is that on the top there's our flow how we usually do things. So we have some design design stuff mode sometimes IFC models than we have drawings or some price lists and product documents, EPDs or other things and usually those cannot be used directly, so we have to do some prepausing with them and AI is one of the solutions on how you can you pre

pa s s them.

And when you have the things passed and

and when you have the understanding of those documents, then we can combine the information from the documents and the drawings to our

bigger hole and usually that there's a lot, last thing is the store everything in some some place in some pro process database and it can be used on, of course, one major things is the cost calculation, and nowadays the carbon calculation, but the dense core comes the construction phase so we can do scheduling and design steering and procurement and logistics on the construction site side and after after the building is built,

of course you can transfer the things from the product database to

facility management.

And this is the product selection dilemma nowadays, so usually there's multiple criteria in on those and uh one of one of the problems is usually like the local optimization. So it's, it's so easy to select the first

first like product of some what what ticks all the boxes, but, uh, many times it's not in the end like that whole optimized solution.

and usually when when some design select some products, they, they cannot, they don't have all the data for the selection, so the LCA and prizes usually the designers don't have all that information. So

so that many times the selections aren't done with the database. They are like they have some idea or they have before they have make the same decisions so they continue on that way.

And many times, sometimes they are feedback loop on based on previous projects, but not always. So there's no lesson learned on the products selection.

And a little bit about the data, what's what's behind the product selection, usually, uh, if you have some products, use data is across documents and the data isn't pure and that there's no common ontology about things and you basically many times you cannot use the previous data and and many times there's are not continuous flow. You have to fill up, create the document

s fill up some forms on fill up stuff to the different systems again and again and there's no

correct

and how we could tackle this problem that we could use MCPs combined with the AI agents could be the ideal solution and actually nowadays there's a new trend that using some common line tools and actually they work pretty well, but this was before that that late boom about the common line tools, but you can

pretty much it doesn't matter what you need for building this. You need that general agent. You need some tools to understand and work with the files if you have IFC files, you need some, some tool to read, read and have, have, so you can get the data out of the IFC files and many, many documents are in the PDF form, so you need it up some PDF free for the agent.

and uh

if you want to scale it up, the MCP is a good solution where where you can share that this same same solution between the in the organization.

So there's a little bit about the skills now. There's, it's a pretty new concept like uh uh before you have human skills that they are learned by doing and with training, but now now that new trend is like you can have a

green description of how things

should, should be done and the agents can use this discur prescriptions and that usually they are they contain some

domain knowledge that that wasn't wasn't used in a trend data for the large language models and then they can have workflows or design logic and what tools to use in different phases and usually when when the they have like you can have descriptions, what, what's done and how to check.

if is it actually done the process or the workflow.

and then we have a free demos, I hope they are recorded previously, but they don't have any sound, so I will go through them and I hope they work, but I sliced the demos in 3 phases. The first is the basic agents use. It describes how to use the tools and how it usually goes and the second phase is uh how, how to like save the previous workflow as a new skill that you can pre and the third parties

reusing that scalar that has been

built

So let's see, it starts, yes. So this is uh our demo up and there's actually just a few tools that that we are using in this demo because we are working with the IFC files. We have a tool that

so you can open the IFC file, read it, and get additional information about the IFC files. Then we have the documents in this demo that it in PDF form and then for future use because we are using getting the data from the documents we have a database that

when we have read those information the files we can store those that information to database for future use. So when we have the next time, same type type of flow, we don't have to rate that things again and again.

So we can send the IFC model. This is a commonly shared. You can find this all these documents and IFC files in the internet, so they are not not not optimized. So pretty much you can what you want to do, you can send it to agent because the agent knows how to pause IFC files. It can read certain things about the IFC files.

and that there's first so now it's, it can open the IFC file and read the things it from there.

And now we need additional information from the 1st 1st 5 IFC ducks in the.

IFC models, but not all the things are stored in the roll roll like uh FFC element so we need to get the properties for this element. So now we have that 1st 5 elements and their properties.

and in this demo our use cases is the product selection and we need to understand the product selection, not, not by all the cost, but for LCA also.

So at first, we are, we are trying to LCA calculation for these tas.

and for doing the LSCA calculation, we need

the EPD information and for this, I have EPDs for this one supplier of the drugs, so it's just a plain PDF file, and now it uses the PDF reader to read the conduct about the EPD just now

and the EPD because they are using there are some structure but not not anything. Everything, so, so that agents and the language model can can read the content of that EPD from PDF file, put it as text format so it can, so the language model can use it as it and then then it's it's actually knows like it has a pre-trained information what what's actually the NCA calculation.

and it creates pretty OK summary for the LCA calculation. So pretty much now we have done, done in the simplest way, the LCA calculation for the risk ducks based on the EPD documents.

and there's the next next phase is the cost calculation.

and the for the cost calculation

uh we have a price list for the for the lux and it's, it's found on the internet also.

so we can open the price list what contains all the all the prices for the for the sucks. So we can

again pass the information the PDF file, and now, now you can, can, can get the prices and it can make you a summary of the prices and this is what it never do do this what I done done in Limo never do calculation with language models, but it's for the simplistic reasons.

So, so now you have a, you have done an LCA calculation and cost calculation. And based on this you can select products. And many times that you have a if you are selecting product, you are not only

only like uh you need additional information, you don't need information for just one supplier or something. Usually you want to make a comparison of, of the different suppliers. So now, now I read the price list of uh different supplier of the same Ducks and it can make the read the information and make you a summary that what products or what supplier you should actually use in this project.

So pretty much now you have a

cheapest product and you who have made the elastic calculation for the Ducks.

and now the next phase because we have, we have now passed all the, all the information in in those price lists and EPD documents for later use and sharing the sharing the information, you need to store to store the things because I don't want to read and analyze those those things again and again.

So we have a

uh from the MCP we have that database that we can store the prices for the products and the LCA data. So now I'm storing everything what I bought from the documents through the database. So, so when I run this workflow again, I don't need to have those EPD documents or the price list is again and again.

And usually, when, when, when I have select selected correct parts and may make the necessary calculation that usually useless step that I need some, this can be a report on some files for the next person, but this use case I made like I need uh I need to order these things, the construction site. So the new it's the stuff can they can create files or reports or anything.

So in this basic version, I can, I can create a CSV report out of the amounts I got and the LCS staff on their prices and, and the agent can write, write this up for that I can send to construction site or just of any supplier of this thing so I could order them to the site.

So this is just the basic use

but now the second part is like, how, how could we store this flow because I would want to do this flow flow again and again. So how could we do that?

Let's see if I get. So this is the part that is just the same flow, but I got it, cut it in 33 different sections.

So pretty much now when I've done what I need to do this for, for the skills, there's a concept that you can create, create a new skill.

You can have a skill on how to create new skills.

So I have this workflow that works for me. OK, so now I would want to store that workflow for me. So I asked the agent, can you create a workflow on skill, how to do this in the next time I want to do this same thing.

And basically because the agents have a skill of creating new skills. You can just tell it that this is what what I want to do and kind of you like summarize this and write this all steps what I have done and saw this

as a new skill that could, I could use in the next project. And it takes a little bit but not not too long and, and meanwhile, actually they are now the agent is writing the new scale and having the summarization of the previous.

conversation with the Asian on every step. What I, what I've done with it and now it's creating the new ski.

And all the scales are actually because they are text documents that they can be shared, shared and used again and again and

so pretty much this is the skill that the my agent wrote for me those.

so that's all the descriptions of all the phases and what needs to be done and what I want, want to do. So pretty, pretty much it's really all the things I need.

and, and then because the agents can use the file system. It can store the new new skill it brought for this this flow for me so I can make the final adjustments. What do I want and what do I don't want on the about the scale and in the skills you can have a scripts or any logic can be stored if you need some additional tools you can use those.

in this, but, but, but for this demo I want to only have a simple descriptions of all about the scale and, and having been the written form, not nothing too complicated.

So now it's riding the skiller for, for my agent and when, when it's right the skill, the scaler can be used

after this one.

So now this writing it to my file system.

and now, now I have the skill and everything, and it can be used further on.

Then I have to go forward.

quite quickly

I think I have 3 minutes left on the.

last part is 2 minutes, so uh one minute of extra time.

So the last part is using skill because in the last part the previous killer was taught and now, now that skill cannot be used in in the agent flow.

So you can find the AIAC duct flow skill.

and then you can start using the skill and everything I needed was described in the in the scale of file, so pretty much I don't have the kid, give it the additional information. I can start with that. This is IFC model to this every step. I store in that skill as a flow, and now it remembers, remember, so I, I don't have to do the same thing again and again. So it knows how to how to pass I

F C files. It now no no knows in skill that I I want to make LG calculation and where we had to look for the prices because it's all, all described in the scale.

So pretty much it can just you can give it the IFC file now and you can write them up file and then it knows what to do next, so it can go to the database on ets information from the database and then it then it's gonna automatically do the LSCA calculation I don't have to tell tell it these things again and again.

And

I actually did this

language model I'm using it, it

it's not, not uh

the most advanced one, so I do at this moment I have to do a little bit.

extra instruction for it, but pretty much it's gonna make that calculation it can use the database for for the information I just in the previous flow what I saw in the database, it can fetch the information about database and it can make the calculation and the product select selection without any instructions. There's tough stuff for the database.

And then then when everything is OK.

you can just continue to do it and it can, it can create the order file directed to my file system that I can.

send and

send the circumci

and now it's created the CSP file that contains all the calculation calculation and the amounts are needed.

and you can find it in your product file system.

So that's it.

Well, we see how important it is to get the data right at the beginning, and we had a, um, keynote before there was the question, what do we do as a small company and sometimes I'm very jealous about a small companies.

because for us sometimes it takes so much time to connect all the different legacy systems where we store all different types of data, but it would need to come together to actually feed these systems.

Unfortunately, within the time, uh, would have been questioned, so you took all the time. We don't have time for that now. Um, so also for the others, um, now we have Peter from Victor VI, and we usually spend 5 minutes on questions, so let's keep it to 15 minutes and yeah.

Tell us more about moving from manual workflows to automation, I think, right? That's correct.

Good morning everybody.

So I uh

let's give me a second for uh sharing my screen.

There we are

OK

OK, cool. So, um, yeah, I'm Peter, uh, CEO co-founder of Victor, um, I will be sharing a short introduction about Viktor and maybe I will be giving demos, uh, so some vibe coding here will be making some apps. So our motto is automate boring and the awesome. Um, I, I also added a picture of myself, so I think it's really important also to emphasize I'm an engineer myself as well before we founded the Victor

with a group of friends from Delphi University of Technology. Uh, we founded also a bridge building company. We manufactured fiber enforced plastic bridges, um, and we also fully automated that process. That's that's before we started with Victor

But that's still it's relevant because I'll be giving a demo which is related to ah my background. So, uh, why did we, what, what's the mission? What do we envision when building Victor with a group of friends. This is what we defined the aged part because we started Victor about 8 years ago. We of course didn't know that what's going to happen regarding agents. Uh, so we iterated a bit on our mission, but have we empower all engineers

so not everybody has to automate, but we empower you to do so that's to build, connect, and share your tools.

Um, so when we started building Viktor in 2017. We started with uh the concept that should should have a few building blocks. Is the audio OK? OK, cool. Um, so we said, OK, it should be Python-based. There's a very uh it became eventually very popular programming language. Um, we use Python to make vector apps, so web apps because that makes it shareable and uh we put those apps

into an app store which enables every engineer to use those or to find those.

and throughout those, uh, approximately 8 years, um, yeah, we have about 100,000 apps on our platform is being used amongst the biggest projects around the globe, and also being used by the biggest engineering firms and contractors around the globe. So these are these logos, um

so what we know

uh throughout all those years is that automation makes engineers very productive, um, but the difficulty that we had is ah time and skills, uh, because it's what I said in the beginning, we use Python and Python is very effective, but there is only a very small percentage of engineers that are able to write proper Python. So this is a bar chart and the uh years of experience, um, uh, and then, uh, the percentage of Python's people that have P

y th on skills within organizations, so a very small percentage. So there was a big, big challenge for us because we know that automation was very powerful, but we have a blocker, which is of course the skill side.

So and this happens

So there was for us the biggest opportunity uh because we knew that Python was a very popular language. Aalams are being built based on, of course, a lot of volume, uh, Python was of course a very popular language, so it's been trained also from Python, so that's great. Uh, so we identified it as a big opportunity, so we said we started this sort of this gimmick project we call Hector instead of Victor because yeah that's what happens, you know, with a lot of, you know, engineers in in the company. Um, so, and this pose

I posted this about 2.5 years ago. There were a few months after, after JGPT was launched and that we identified this as a big opportunity, so about 3 years ago.

So, OK, so why does this matter? So to come back to uh my background, so I have a background in civil engineering. So what it says there before we started taking, we had a bridge building company fully automated. We made 5 reinforced plastic bridges. This is one of them, um, because of time cons will not show the prediction because that's not relevant. I think we have to focus on time. So to design this bridge, so that's now I'm going to sort of prepare the demo because I will just go into the product and then start showing you how I

would use Victor when I was making this engineering tool, so we did the analysis, of course, within Excel.

I hated Excel, but I still use it. I still use it even though that we have Victor. Um, so, and then we have the reporting of a project and of course the production dogs.

So,

this, this is a bit of an introduction of the demo.

So let's go to demo

There we are

So, before I'm going to build the actual app, and that's why I said, OK, this is what we did, bridge building, we did the analysis, drawings, etc. reporting, etc. So I'm going to build this app before doing so, I just want to show you very briefly what Victor is about. So this is the platform, um, yeah, for project structure, yeah, if you were developing the environment or to make those apps and they have the App Store. So in the app store, what is that, you know, those are where the components, and then you have user management system integrations to integrate locally but also to the cloud.

Um, because loading takes a bit, so I just said, OK, maybe a blank page and now I'm just going to the developed part of Victor, but they're not going to start here because it takes a few seconds more and I have to be very keen on time.

So, I will just directly load uh a prompt.

into the app builder. So in the meantime, I just want to explain a bit what's what's going on here. So

as an engineer, when I was doing the design analysis, uh, I had a few steps, so initially what's and that's also how I eventually am defining is that by means of prompting. I'm just thinking as an engineer, uh, and making the, uh, the actual logic on the background.

So, um, I want to define a cross section, um, this has to be, you know, top and bottom and sides and webs, and this, I want to see this geometry and I also want to make it parameterized.

Uh, the following step is that, um, I want to determine the stiffness because I'm using fiber enforced plastic, so those are fibers combination with resin, uh, these have certain mechanical characteristics. So this is a separate staff within the engineering process, which I did.

Um, so, and eventually when you combine those mechanical properties, so you have the 2D geometry, you have the mechanical properties of each layer that as a whole.

should generate uh the mechanical properties of the bridge itself.

So and the last step that I want to uh to make is that it eventually determines the deformation of the beach according to a certain standard.

Um, so, and as you can see here, uh it is generating the actual code, so we have to wait a bit. So, and what's happening on the background? So I said, OK, this is a prompt.

This is what, uh, I want to uh have and at at that particular moment we are using Ethropic, in this case a cloud so on 4.6 and um the LLM is combined with all the context that we have because throughout all those years we have invested in our software development kit. We have invested in megaron codes and reporting, etc. and there's all this context is provided to the LLM, which is in our own

instance and it generates the actual code.

So as you can see here, uh, it's generated uh Byton code, which is also vector specific. So that's what happened. Um, so I've made this app which is and I've of course test this a lot, so I know that this is exactly the type of application that I want to have because I can define here the medical, mechanical property, by the way, regarding time, I don't see a timer, so, uh

OK, I have 6 minutes. OK. Um, so,

I, I've tested it a lot because I test the product a lot and I know that this thing is working well, so just defined a bending station is and also bending deformation. So this is what it made

but this is sort of a replacement of the Excel sheet, um, so, and does, you know, does it really bring value because that was a question, right? Are we just contoc, contourv? What's the value? So this is a starting point to make an vector application which we are already doing in minutes, right? So this is a quite exceptional already. So, uh, I prepared another part of them, so I have to fast forward a bit because otherwise I have to do a lot of fronting. So

what I did here, so I just have the same uh prompt here as you can see here, the same prompts, uh, but I'm going to extend it so I'm going to extend it with someone want to have a 3D geometry of the bridge. Um, I also want to have an arch of the bridge because now it's sort of flat being visualized, um, uh, yeah, so also what did they, oh yeah, uh, yeah, a person, so I also added a person to have sort of an understanding of the size of the bridge

I want to download the actual geometry. I also want to do the reporting automatically.

there was a by the way fix, a book fix, um, so, so etc. etc. So that's now I wait now I sort of have not the Excel sheet, but let's say something on steroids. So the cool thing here, I also add an LLM, so that's something that you can do right out of the book. So if you log into Viktor, you can just have an LLM in an app, so an agentic app. So for instance, I deployed this app and what we have seen throughout the time is that how will I trust this app? Will it support me? And then it's a black box because I'm not able to

see the code, so I want to understand, so what's going on here? So, uh, XX explain uh what this app is about

uh, which design

guidelines are

used or I'm also making typos, sorry for that.

Uh, and give a list

of all

30 vectors.

So this is quite cool because now we had the Python logic.

and I'm to go through those shows that you have the automatic reporting and they doing the 3D geometry as well. But now we can also start talking to the actual web, so I also can sort of, if I didn't build the app maybe I'm sharing it to somebody else, so that's also something that you can do as so you can also collaborate on building an app, so I'm prompting this app, but you can also add another person that's going to continue prompting on the actual app.

Um

so, uh,

yeah, so, of course, so there's some information here. I'm not going to elaborate on that. Um, so let me, let me force forward to this up. So I saw made a decision to make me stepwise editor, so I know each step of designing the actual bridge, um

so this is the sort gene so now it's generating the 3D geometry. So give me a sec.

So this is what it made

I can also download this, um, and of course, I also had the automatic reporting so I can just generate a report, uh

of the actual app. So this is without a template, but I can also add a template.

Yeah.

So, uh, uh, how much time do you have?

5 minutes. OK, OK, the only thing I want to just show you one thing, that's the last thing I want to show. So

I'm gonna be able to run it fully, but this is an app which has also been prompted, which integrates with eTAs. So I just made an app just with only Python logic to geometry, etc. but I'm also able to integrate directly with the local software, so from the clouds integrating local software, vibe coding an app on top of your local software at the same time I can also directly integrate, for instance, with the ACC on a cloud software so I can just do both integrations, 5 coding at the same time.

So that's

if you want to see it, just come to me and just show it showed you life, so I will have to skip it, otherwise I will sort of don't have enough time. So,

um, so how do we look at the vector? So we now I just showed you that they can make apps.

um

so and on top of those apps, that's something that we are making now is that you can say orchestrate those apps so you can make all kinds of small components which are very valuable and then you can just orchestrate a workflow by means of apps, um, and then of course it's something that that's something that's already been demoed. We have webinars showing this already that you can still build your own agent that says, OK, orchestrate me a fully workflow of designing a civil, let's say a fire addict or something which contains geotechnical structural, etc.

Now, this is, this is, by the way, the recording of the workflow, but that was skipped it as well. So the question is, OK, what makes Victor different with respect to maybe other things that are on the market. Uh, this is something also from the beginning that I started we our founding team has an engineering DNA, so everything that we built was always with the goal and the focus on engineering. So we have a specific software development kit. We focused on deterministic tools, so no probabilistic outcomes. Uh, we have the infras

tru c ture which is focused on working in projects. We have the integrations with Outerdesk AC Nemezek Trimble Bentley, etc. We do on cloud and on-prem, so you're taking that into account, um, we are also providing the in the engineering grades validation so validating apps, doing quality assurance, making it transparent, which I also showed with the demo, and we provide specific supports.

Yeah, so that's it. So if you want to try victory, you can just what I just built, you can also build yourself right now. So if you go to this, uh, QR codes.

Cool

Thank you so much

And uh sorry for petting a lot of pressure on. I think it's really, really important to also let the audience ask some questions, just sharing something about me. I'm German, so I'm very proud of made in Germany, but now I'm living in the Netherlands, and then I was seeing that Victor is basically based on Tyson. That's invented by Guido von Rossam, so Victor's Dutch, so this is made in the Netherlands, right? So great to see you. Yeah, um, good. Where's the first

question? that she's over there.

Yeah.

Don't be shy

There we see, yeah

Yes, hello, thank you, very interesting presentation. Uh

have you applied this to other than structural analysis. This is, I, I like the idea of having smaller app solving smaller problems, but still like dedicated apps for specific problems, but have you tried this for other than structural ana analysis. Yeah, thank you for your question. That's also difficult for me to make a very specific demo. It's mostly one domain, um, but it's being used across the board, so like the bigger engineering companies which I showed

they are using it amongst all of their business lines so it can be water engineering, environmental, geotechnical, uh, process engineering. So it's, it's quite diverse and not engineering companies but also asset owners and construction companies.

Question from the Netherlands.

Good morning. I'm with the Federation of the Dutch Construction Industry. Um, I have a bit of a concern, not mainly technical one, but a a concern as a parent. I have 3 sons and one of them just graduated as a a coder. He he can do coding.

Um

and he doesn't really know how to code. He, he, he, he, he told me.

they don't know how to write, they don't, they are afraid of calling people and stuff, but, uh, so the, the main question is, if I ask him, does the thing that you've just quoted, does it do the job? He said, Yes, it does. Can you follow it back through?

to the beginning? And he says, no. So my question is, if you are a designer, you're making a bridge because coding can literally fall apart and then it's nothing, nothing happens, but if a bridge falls apart, something happens.

So can we actually see uh civil engineers growing up, not knowing exactly what they do, and is it a worry for you somehow? It's a difficult question, but no, I, I understand the question. So for me there's a big that's something that you understand my question. That's good. No, no, but I'll say it's very relevant question and a discussion within our company as well. Um, but there's a big difference between somebody that codes and a civil engineer, right? So

you can have a programmer that doesn't know anything about civil engineering, and our audience, are silver engineers. So, and we provide something which is transparent. I think they are not realil engineers anymore because on school, they don't learn to calculate and to do things. They just use codes to yeah, they're lazy just like us, right? Yeah, I'm not responsible how sort of the school's being organized our audience

is what I said in the slogan in the beginning, automate the boring engine really awesome. I've been an engineer. I'm still an engineer, but there was a lot of boring work, right? So, and what was mentioned in the keynote, there is a shortage in engineering, so a lot of work shorts in engineering, and the challenges are becoming way more advanced, I would say, right? Climate change, housing shortage, infrastructure aging infrastructure. So we have to build tools for the engineers which fit the current age. This inevitable that this is happening and we are providing a platform for it and regard

ing how what they're doing at school and that they don't learn civil engineering. It's really difficult for me to be influencing, right?

Yeah, I I've, yeah, there's a, a likelihood, you know, I also see my own kids, you know, they don't Google anymore, and Google is sort of a facilitator to get to information and digest the information. Now JGBT just gives you the answer, which is risky. So, but I still think it's what we built, we, we always have to have traceable answers, deterministic, traceable, transparent answers. Yeah.

fantastic. We don't have a question online, but also to anyone else, you can still follow up, uh, due to, uh, via the app and um all speakers will go there and um also go in contact with you.

We would have time not for physical philosophical question, uh, like the previous one, but we would have time for a very short one. So I think there was one at the back. If it's a short question, then let's go for it.

Yeah, yeah. Don't be shy.

So my question is somewhat related to the previous question. I work for AAA. You probably know it. Um, and when you build all these apps, you say they are deterministic, but behind it there is a nondeterministic LLM. And so I'm wondering if you build all these apps, how do you make them compliant because you want to use them in the real world, but then certainly for the government, there's a big compliance issue and then we have no idea how these apps are made or working.

Yeah, so what I mentioned in the beginning, we, we, we didn't just start a year ago, so we are doing this for more than 8 years, and those apps are being used on the biggest infrastructural projects around the globe. So to make those apps, let's say reliable. We know how, what to do. So that's something that we know, um, now we have to provide the people that are doing what I did with vibe coding. We have to provide them with the right, let's say, governance structure, so I didn't present it because I didn't have enough time.

but we have governance structures in place that say, OK, I'm vibe coding yourself. Um, I can share with a colleague, do a peer review on the code and then I can publish it in a testing environment. The testing environment there's a bigger group, and then before we so there are a lot of stages before you bring it in production to an actual use of an app, so there's a sort of a ver verified stage. So that's and if you're interested, I can just present it to you. um, but it's, that's something that we know and that we are, let's say,

very experienced in to make that happen because you know what I said the the the the years of experience.

Let's talk

Thank you so much. Once more applause for Peter. OK, thanks.

And now we have uh from Bentley, Daniel and Luis Martin.

come to the stage and the working title is quite long. AI-driven workflows for accelerating project delivery

The stage is yours. The timers over there. Don't worry, it gets reloaded.

All right, so, um, I wanted to start off with a statement that you know as of September 2025, it's being forecasted by McKenzie and Associates and Company is that there will be $106 trillion investment over the next 15 years um about the uh the meeting the needs of the new and updated infrastructure, um, that's coming out. I think everyone in this um particular uh room right here and online are part of that ecosystem, right? Um, so with that, um

I wanted to say that we want to um show some products here, um, so some things that um

all of us understand that, you know, any kind of um uh workflow and features that we have will definitely um

uh

make deliverables easier and quicker as we go in for time savings. So our goal here is to understand our user challenges in design and project delivery where AI tools that remove daily efficiencies or um daily inefficiencies I should say. Um, with that, I just wanted to say that, you know, infrastructure projects are getting larger, more complex, and under tighter deadlines and traditional workflows can't keep up with that. So I'm Dan Eng. I'm one of the

MicroStation product experts at Bentley, and I'm joined by Dr. Louis Martin Lozier. Yeah, and so I'm senior product manager, Lee DI for MicroStation, and we're exciting to show how AI is transforming infrastructure project delivery worldwide. Uh, beyond infrastructure investment, forecasts our industry faces growing pressure that we must address.

to you then. OK. So again with the the larger and bigger infrastructure projects, I think there's definitely rapid urbanization that's trying to control some of these drivers. There's aging infrastructure and there's also a climate resilience and fewer engineers out in the workforce these days. So our vision here is to empower the next generation of infrastructure design and which means leveraging AI to accelerate project delivery without compromising

quality.

So our goals here were to develop purpose-built AI solutions for infrastructure professionals and create contextual aware AI tools and features that solve our user's most pressing problems.

Therefore, um, let's see here.

Oh, wrong way

OK. So, um, when I say that, you know, it's a capacity to deliver it and how do we design, build, and repurpose fast enough to support this growing demand. The reality is, is that simply there aren't enough engineers in the world to do all the work that needs to be done.

So first, I think we need to have better tools that remove friction in your CAD workflows. Um, smarter workflows that automate repeatable steps.

and then also, thirdly, connected data, decisions that are made faster and better with the foundation, um, Louis Martin will show us how we're making this real.

So infrastructure,

infrastructure generate huge amounts of data. When that data is still low, AI can use it effectively. AI needs standardized data plus engineering context to be trustworthy.

The challenge is interoperability across many tools and format.

Bentley Infrastructure Cloud, Connect, and Contextualize data unlocking AI value.

With connected data, we can now focus on meaningful, reliable AI outcome.

So let's discuss a little bit about trustworthy AI. Engineering

engineers were creatively but precision is a consequence are not negotiable. Infrastructure AI must remain human in the loop.

Trustworthy AI requires the right context to be useful.

The key question what define context for infrastructure AI.

That foundation starts with the Bentley Core AI principle.

So unlike a few other software vendors at Bentley, we, we made the commitment that our users that

your data will always be your data.

Mentally opt-in model for data sharing, whereas other few software vendors have an opt-out approach by default. There are 3 aspects of this commitment. You will always retain control of your data and we'll decide if and how it's used for AI. You will always have the final decision on contributing or not contributing your data to train models that benefit others. You will always

share with you how we created AI.

models and the data that we use to develop them. Of course, such commitment limits that what we can do and how fast we can move. However, we see it as a foundation to the responsible development of AI and key further strengthening relationship with our user base on trust and transparency.

OK, so, um, we adopted a continuous discovery process to address our industry needs and challenges, and because of this, what we did was we had two workshops that we conducted, one in the US and Kansas City in the United States, um, and then also in London. And we had an apo team that was consisted of product managers, our UX designers, our developers and product experts. Um, that we hosted these workshops

where we conducted interviews with our users, and we wanted to learn about their their we did a challenge exploration and also day to day workflow discussions.

and as part of that user journey exercise, we focus on covering the real pain points of the project delivery.

The key questions that we asked were, where are the bottlenecks in your workflows? Where do delays happen in your work, in your day to day, often um workflows also. And then which daily task consumed the most time.

So after a full day of whiteboarding and analyzing the current state of the infrastructure project delivery.

We, um

uh wrong way, sorry.

Um, we found that a couple of themes that happened here manual process is um basically dominate, um, causing these really long progressive delays and slowing the progress. There's knowledge gaps that lead decision making among peers and colleagues, which delays that um

process. And then we also found that drawing production and labeling remain major bottlenecks, um, which often leads to costly rework.

So one engineer actually stepped back and said, um, in the workshop, this isn't an engineering problem, it's a time problem. So, um, what we realize is that how do we focus on reducing that time with that.

So with that, um

from this, we've came up with three themes that we kind of worked on out of these uh the workshop is automation

uh, learning and health, and drawing production.

Um, so in the automation, um, side, we looked at having the Python editor, which enables the scripting and workflow automation inside of a microstation for manual tasks to kind of automate those and basically free up time and give you higher value work. Um,

and then we also looked at, um, learning and help which we introduced the Python Assistant, which helps you vibe code and then also um Bentley co-pilots will be introduced to help with the onboarding and then from a drawing production standpoint we looked at automatic annotation and labeling, so I think in the next uh

here, um, I'll hand it over to um Lee Martin to go over the demos here. OK. So an engineer needs to place safety barrier along a complex roadway. Traditionally, this means hours of repetitive manual work and rework every time the the alignment change.

Oh, let me start the video. Yeah. Uh, with the Python system, the engineer simply described the intent AI helps generate the script that plays the barrier automatically and align the design geometry. When the road changes, the script is rerun in a second.

Now we are opening the Python.

editor with the Python Assistant.

and we will

prompt to create the script

to automate the barrier creation.

So democratized the use of

automation. You don't need to be a programmer to create an animation. You can just

ask the other of them and it will create the, the script for you.

So the result is faster than delivery consistent result, and more time spent on engineering decisions, not drafting tasks. This is how AI-driven automation powered the next generation of infrastructure design.

Dimensioning is essential, but it's also one of the most repetitive and time consuming part of drawing production.

Engineering often spent hours placing and updating dimension by an, especially when des design involved.

With the Python system, the engineering described the antenna of dimensioning and the EI helps generate script that apply dimension automatically based on the model geometry.

When the design changed, the dimension of update cons consistently.

by rerunning the script.

So then after that you can move your dimension on your design.

An engineering familiar with AutoCA joined the project in microStation. Even with a year of experience switching software learning new tool can slow the productivity and create friction in a daily workflow. With the Bentico pilot, the user set their background and intent. Co-pilot use contextual memory to translate concept, command, and terminology into something immediately familiar, guiding the user step by step within the active design context.

So it, it tells you where are the tools uh how to, to do this workflow, uh, so you're a smooth creating a smooth surface, and what are the term in ACAT and what are the term in in microstation.

So the result is a faster onboarding, less disruption, and confident execution, allowing engineering to focus on delivering quality design or rather than relearning software.

So here is an engineering working as a consultant for Florida DUT Department of Transportation. You need to ensure that the design complies with FDOTAT standard. So using the Bentico pilot, they attached the FDOTA manual PDF and ask co-pilot to compare the project level naming convention against the standard. So co-pilot reviews the file and clearly highlight where the design is compliant and where it's not.

Instead of manual check, the engineer gets immediate actionable.

feedback, helping to ensure standard compliance before submission and reducing downstream reward.

In open world designer, an intersections start with standard annotation that are difficult to read and inconsistent. Adjusting label manually would take time and often lead to rework. So using the AI label optimizer, label our automatically reposition and refined for clarifying.

for clarify base and train annotation model.

So the engineer then used BenticoPilott to ask how to annotate specific geometry, run a geome geometry report and query applicable design standards such as the minimum design speed based on traffic volume.

By combining AI-driven labeling and the contextware system, the engineer produced a clearer, standard line drawing faster with fewer manuals that and greater confidence in the result.

For the site, civil design, OpenSight Plus, an engineer is designing a land development project and needs to move quickly from concept to detailed design without switching tool or losing context.

So with opensightPlus data is brought easily and the geometry is created contextually. For example, generating a path site based on required

size and slope, then positioning, positioning it precisely using Nording and easting coordinate.

So

so in this section, we just saw basically um the terrain that was re-optimized here and you can see that with the re-optimization of it, you can see that we actually optimized and saved some of the the ground and money for that particular project here.

Back to you then. All right, so, um, to kind of wrap it up here, uh, the key, um, AI-powered features and benefits here is that the automation that we have is that we see that scripting in Python and with the AI assistants can help vibe code with APIs using, you know, natural language. We have AI power drawing production applications with, with that will assist engineers that will assist with their work and then we also have, um, you know, AI um co-pilot, um, assistance, um,

which will reduce the manual data, um, um

retrieval time and provide optimized analysis for site layout in this case, um, but that, um, so in summary, um, we have purpose-built AI assisted tools that deliver real value for infrastructure project deliverables, AIsist design doesn't replace it and I think we're only at the beginning of what we can unlock as the potential, um, in AI design and project delivery for, um, infrastructure projects.

So with that, if you wanted to connect with us, feel free to scan the QR codes and we can um

um get with you on LinkedIn. So and if you want to do live demo also, we can, we have the two days so we can do a live demo with you and show you all the product work.

Fantastic. Thank you so much, Luis Martin and Daniel.

AI everywhere, so we have the traditional, let's say, applications. We had like a new tools coming. We also saw like the engineers within the companies also developing uh on their own. Any questions to the Bentley team here? Oh, I see directly at the front.

Hey, thank you. um Oksana Kloon, um, I have a question about how do you manage to train um the system.

if for your customers' data stays secured uh only for customers and uh I understood that it can't be used for training.

so

we, we train our data, we have a lot of SME working at Bentley. We have a lot of experienced engineer in that field. So we create some of our design that we train on it and uh with all that that experience, same thing for the documentation, so the Bentley Learning and EP. We work with SMEU creating a lot of lists of questions and answering we validate those questions and answer and that's LLP training the the model.

The one thing that we noticed here in one of the demos here is that if you do have your own data like the PDF, you could put that, load that in, and then it will ingest it, and then you could then query on that own PDF. So again, it's your data, not ours, that will be looking at and querying from that side of things.

Do we have one more question here in the room.

Is it going to be an acquisition conversation or Yeah, thank you for your presentation. I'm keen on the distribution of the tools that you are making uh by means of vi coding. You said that you were making Python sort of snippets or components, and yeah, what, how does the distribution strategy look like?

Well, I can say from that side of things, it's you you have your own um

um Python scripting that you would create on your own side of things, and basically, you know, those would be your own scripts. Um, there is a GitHub repository up there that will pull the APIs if you wanted to bring that information in itself, but from a distribution standpoint, I guess you can always contribute to the the GitHub repository if you wanted, and where to start, we have about 170 sample on the Gita repositories, so you have some examples there where to start. And each release that we have a microStation we put out

more examples, samples within microstation as well.

that

So to understand it correctly, if, if I'm a user of the product and I want to store the snippet that I made in the Get a propository. Do I have to have an account also at uh Github?

Uh, I think, yeah, you would probably need a a GitHub um account. OK. Thank you so much. One more applause.

Thank you.

Then we have one more presentation within this session. Last but not least, Richard Parker was the title empowering Every Engineer with generator PAI. That's a big promise. Good luck. Thank you.

Uh, hopefully you can all hear me. Uh, my name's Richard Parker, and uh I work for AKT in London, which is part of the Tyrans Group. Uh

and I'm here to, excuse me, present

can I get some water, sorry.

Thank you.

Uh, here to present a doctor engineer. Um

so

I can't see the slides on

on here

OK, I, I can see it now. Yeah, thank you.

Um, so A. Engineer, it's a, it's an AI native agentic platform to assist engineers building, uh, tools and workflows to a system automating their, their calculation, uh, tasks and workloads in their daily work.

Um, this is just a, a screen grab of, of, of the platform. You can all visit the website, which is aarengineer and this is the kind of sign up landing page that you'll be visiting you, you'll sort of be greeted with, um, I'll just jump in straight into a video, a demo, and then I'll just do a bit of a deeper dive into more of the platform and the philosophy, uh, behind, behind it. So if we could roll the video, please.

Um

hopefully this please

Uh, I think it's on the slide before, if you could press play on the the slide if that's possible.

Thank you, sorry. I should automate the slides.

Engineering will never be the same again.

Proudly presenting a dot engineer, agentic AI system that automates engineering calculations and reporting.

It all starts with a simple prompt.

Just in some seconds, A. Engineer will create a plan how to build the calculation tools needed.

Confirm the plan and see your tool building up in no time.

If you want, you can also create new tools from your existing Excel tools, example calculation outputs or reference project data.

Test your tools with real-world input values to ensure you and A. Engineer can trust the tool ever after.

AO Engineer gives you both the visual UI and code behind the tool, ensuring there will be no AI black boxes anymore.

Once you are satisfied with the quality in your tests. Verify your tool and publish it to your private calculation toolkit and allow a engineer to use high quality calculations tools when moving forward.

We're just getting started

Once you now have an AI companion who can calculate and who you can trust. Let's move into something even more electrifying.

The reports

Describe your problem or the report you need to deliver for your customer and a engineer will ramp up an agentic flow that will take you there.

By combining your project data from legacy systems, your verified calculation tools you just created and army of ready-made AI agents, A. Engineer will automatically write your report in just a couple of minutes.

It will include text summaries, tables, drawings, and other visualizations, all aspects that are professional engineering report should contain.

And as always, when using AO engineer, it comes with maximum transparency regarding its actions and fully auditable agentic workflow. It is just autonomously created for you.

Once you're satisfied, verify your report quality, download it as PDF, and send it to your customer or add it to your project documentation.

Now I have explained how AO engineer works. Engineering as it should be empowered by AI, verified by you, but some things just cannot be explained. Those need to be experienced.

OK, so, um, yeah, a bit about the uh the kind of philosophy and and kind of the vision that we see for, for the platform. It's, uh, we see it following a trend that has been sort of happening in the legal industry and the kind of legal experts and the profession that they have and, and that they deal for their clients. Their clients are putting a huge amount of responsibility and the legal experts to deliver them.

to deliver them reliable quality and take account for that and also the fact that

that there's a huge amount of risk, maybe financial risk in that sector in our sector, it's even, even more critical. It's life safety and and what they're doing is they're connecting their legal experts or our engineering experts with this kind of, uh, with the AI kind of brain and uh and uh and performance that these models have, but filling in with a layer of kind of structure and and security that connects to the engineering profe professionals and, uh, and we

see this as in the same way that the medium of the lawyers are working with languages and text, uh, engineers are working in the medium of of of tabular information calculations kind of deterministic function based, uh, kind of approach and we're taking, uh, trying to adapt that to, to engineering in, in, in the same way to, to provide that structure for our for our experts to utilize.

And, and so we, we want to build, uh, this layer of verification, this, this ability for for engineers to have this credible peer review process and to be able to introspect down from not just the inputs and the outputs, but, but all the way down to the kind of code that's being executed under the hood, so there is kind of this auditable trail of exactly what what has happened under under the hood, uh, because we really do need to be accountable for what this delivers at the end of the day.

Um

and kind of the scope of the challenge that we're trying to tackle, where we're trying to go from tackling not not just minutes, but, but kind of large chunks of time. So days of, of tasks that that engineers work through. And I think that the approach that we're taking is to, to sort of

use these, these, uh, these tools and as, as part of workflows, but each of these tools that that an engineer uses is the smallest module of work, so it can be reused across multiple projects across multiple workflows, because we know that in the, in the industry and every project is different every, every workflow, every challenge is different. And if we can find the smallest unit of work, it can be reused many more times, and we get a higher level of return on investment from from developing these tools, and this is kind of the the philosophy

and kind of the the backbone of of how this software is, is kind of being developed.

So

the, the, the engineers, they, they, they, they the main interaction or portal for the engineers to come to is this kind of dialogue that they have with the agent, which, which will create these, these tools and workflows and you you simply describe the task or problem that you're trying to achieve. Um, the engineer, the, the agents that we have will look along your, uh, around your portfolio of tools that you've created or or verified before. We'll also have a look at tools that have been shared with you that have been verified, or

on an organizational level, it will look across what is available within the organization to see if there's tools that have already been created, it will not recreate them. It will suggest, do you want to reuse those within this workflow. It kind of makes sense. And what we also do is try to bring in data because we know

engineers rely on their trusted analysis softwares to get them the, the, the kind of analysis results that they need, um, and a lot of the time we're taking the results of that and extending it to get to a final deliverable or design, and so we need to connect to those data systems and we're building integrations directly with those. Um, there also needs to be a really strong element of human in the loop. So how the system interacts, how the, how the system queries and goes back to the engineer and that's for verification

on did you actually mean this or that? There's a lot of ambiguity. People will write the shortest prompt they can go for, and naturally that's the thing to do, but the scope of the design problem can be quite big and so the system is designed to help scope the engineer or guide the engineer along to a solution rather than just giving them simply a one shot solution.

So this is kind of

it's a challenge, uh, to sort of make sure that that that guide is enough but not uh sort of, uh, sort of given a happy problem with without them understanding all of the assumptions that are made in these tools.

And obviously your

your outputs and your inputs are kind of

very, uh, observable, but also the underlying code that's being executed within each of those tools is, is, uh, is sort of visible.

So

the applicability of the system, we see it all along two dimensions, sort of, uh, the engineers are generally sort of um

looking at, uh, sort of a varying level of problems depending on the stage of the project and, uh, we, we believe that the engineers are more valuable and more creative in kind of the early stages in the more, uh, where the design space is much larger where they're thinking about coordination, spatial coordination, uh, kind of the high-level problem thinking, the optimization, and I think engineers at the moment are getting bogged down with quite

uh, heavy data heavy models trying to, uh, visualize data that, that, that, they're probably struggling with, um, to come up with good visualizations, automation of, of large element numbers, summaries, things that can really be take out, you know, things that engineers are not really uh happy with doing, taking the drudgery out of the work and bring back the excitement of actually solving the real problems which are kind of the higher order problems which I see as geometry and kind of optimization. An engine

er is, is, is tuned to sort of take away these lower level problems, but with the ultimate aim of moving higher and higher into that kind of design space of creativity. Um, but I, I see this as these problems is very easily easy targets at the moment with the uh uh the the kind of foundational models that, that our system uses.

I, I mentioned um my background. I've got um sort of project work of over 12 years' experience as a structural engineer delivering sort of projects in the UK and internationally, but over the past sort of 5 years I've been, been involved in, in this projects and other digital projects, but I see the application across the Turns group, especially with a large number of consultants across a huge range of disciplines within sort of hydraulicin engineering environment

al um, rock engineering, all sorts of bridge engineering. I think there's a huge application out there, and we're seeing that from, from our kind of feedback loop within the Tyrrins group that, uh, that are using and, and, uh, and sort of stretching the limits of the platform in these in these kind of disciplines.

It's very difficult to put numbers on these things, but, but I, I, I think the target is, is sort of 5 to 15 hours of work that we can easily get out of of engineers using this platform if we really try and tackle those kind of

rather mundane tasks of, of, of automating those calculations. I think once, once our engineers have done those calculations once, we should sort of raise them up to an organizational level and try and share that knowledge at the moment, it kind of gets siloed in every project, and I think that's a huge waste of, of talent, of, uh, by, by sort of recreating these, these kind of very small tools that can be shared, um, I believe quite easily.

Um

and just going back to an earlier comment of why I think our platform is, is needed, and I think just giving direct access to these raw models is risky and I, I think, um, there needs to be some level of assistance in, in, in guiding engineers in a, in a, in a good way to get the value out of them. So I, I think there needs to be many layers in this to sort of achieve outcomes or deliverables, and I think what we try to do

here is in this diagram demonstrate we've got the models at the bottom, but we, we, we connect that or try to connect that seamlessly with the data because the models don't connect

directly to the data which they use on a daily basis and does some majority of, of the analysis in their work and then on the right hand side we've got the agents which take away kind of the laborious tasks of, OK, I need to automate this design multiple times or I need to generate this chart that can, you know, really demonstrate

thousands of calculations and summarize it in a nice way like this is stuff that engineers struggle with, and AI is very good at this or choosing tools, maybe the, the organization has 100 tools, but it's, it's, uh, it's difficult for them to, for that to come to the forefront of which, which one is applicable in their case, or maybe they can reuse something that someone else has done before, and I think this is where AI really comes into itself. And then on top of that, we have kind of this deterministic layer where

this, this reliability and accountability, uh, kind of aspects of it, and we want to leverage

tool, tool creation to, to, to sort of combat that in a way that engineers can

basically verify or peer review maybe 10s, hundreds of times at all across an organization, so there's trust built within that tool so they can inspect the code that's being executed in that tool. And so that you're not probabilistically sort of generating something new every time or having to verify it. That verification has been done once, twice, 3 times. It doesn't need to be repeated. And therefore we get scalability out of out of what it's been uh kind of the company's invest

ment or the user's investment in building those tools, and I think that kind of

also reduces the, the, the cost and the, the, uh, the, the question of the return on investment in in in these uh in these building these automations.

Um

and then, yeah, just to focus on, I guess the output from the from the platform we aim for, really high-quality scientific um reporting output that you can read and inspect and share with your colleagues. So this is kind of, you need to send it to a third party. You need to send it to a colleague. We should be sort of producing readable content at the end of the day, not sort of

only in a website, but, but also kind of something readable and and sort of um uh universal across the industry.

Um

the platform is, is open. We build publicly. It's it's available if you want to sign up for free. Um, but we also have, uh, different tiers. So if you want to use the, the, the platform more heavily. We have a professional um subscription and, uh, and also enterprise uh, plans to sort of bringing that, that kind of, uh, integration of collaboration features and sharing of tools and workflows. That's kind of

uh, that, that kind of model.

Um

there is a a voucher code if you really want to sort of visit the website and use the platform heavily, so this one month free subscription. So that's a Helsinki engineer if you use that code, you can sort of get one month free, free pro subscription.

and

I'll wrap it up there. Thanks for listening and yeah, enjoy.

Well, I had one job to keep the time just because you are hungry, so my second job is to make the remark that the lunch will be on the ground floor.

That being said, we still have time for 1 to 2 questions before you go there, um, who has a question to Richard.

Yeah, yeah, at the front

Yes, hi. My name is Bam. Uh, wanted to ask about uh input to the platform, for instance, if you want to input some geometry of the building, how reliable is the platform reading it from the whatever 3D party software have you experienced any challenges with ridden the geometry reliably.

Yeah, so, uh, I think

uh, in terms of reading geometry, we, we, we connect to, um, we've got, we've got a sort of working, uh, connected to, to etops, um, which is one of the first sort of integrations that we're looking at and sort of, uh, being able to describe, uh, describe the problem we, we create a series of built-in tools, um, that request information from it, but um,

it's, it requires the user to describe specifically maybe groups or specific element sets for it to identify and extract. That works quite well. Uh

but if the user is being quite vague, then it has to ask quite a few questions to get to identify within the model like specifically what they want, and we find that users are a bit um

uh, vague in in terms of the first response and we sort of have to go in with, with kind of this human in the loop and sort of interrogate before we start extracting huge amounts of, because it can be quite time-consuming to to extract this information, so.

yeah.

And I think that's exactly where I'm excited about next year, and we will likely see more metrics. We will see more in terms of traceability because we also see already now moving from prompt engineering more towards Agente.

um, and I think that's just like an evolving journey that we are all on, whether it's um

maybe already traditional companies, whether these are uh maybe more recent companies now.

uh, whether these are like the engineers who are working in any of these uh different fields. So I'm excited about what's coming, but I think most excitedly about the lunch. So, uh, keep up the conversation. Go to the ground floor, um, I think it's self service, and joy and yeah, have good discussions and uh thank you so much for joining the session.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "AI in AEC 2026" event's "Session 2: Demos" brought together industry leaders to showcase transformative AI applications in architecture, engineering, and construction. Alexey Serous opened the session by demonstrating how Autodesk Robot Structural Analysis software integrates AI tools to automate tasks like modifying trusses and analyzing load-bearing frames. He delved into technical aspects, explaining token-based AI response times, attention layers in large language models (LLMs), and challenges like hallucinations in AI outputs, which require careful context management to ensure reliability.

Bentley's presentation, led by Daniel Eng and Louis Martin Losier, introduced Bentley Copilot and Python Assistant, tools designed to streamline workflows and enhance productivity. Bentley Copilot assists users in navigating software and ensuring compliance with standards like FDOT CAD guidelines, while Python Assistant enables engineers to automate tasks using natural language scripting. These tools simplify dimensioning, drawing production, and onboarding processes, reducing friction in daily workflows.

Peter Madlener showcased Victor, a platform empowering engineers to create, connect, and share Python-based apps via the Victor App Store. He demonstrated features like 3D geometry visualization and seamless integration with local and cloud-based software, emphasizing transparency, collaboration, and the ability to orchestrate workflows across projects.

Kerkko Niemi and Rasmus Paatsalo presented an AI assistant for product selection in construction, focusing on tasks like IFC file parsing, EPD document analysis, carbon calculation optimization, and CSV report generation. They highlighted the importance of storing workflows as reusable skills, enabling engineers to improve efficiency and reduce redundancy across projects.

Richard Parker concluded the session with ADOT Engineer, an AI-native platform designed to automate engineering calculations and generate high-quality scientific reporting outputs. The platform incorporates a robust peer review process, ensuring verified tools and workflows that maintain transparency and accountability. By connecting verified calculations with project data, ADOT Engineer empowers engineers to focus on higher-order design challenges while automating repetitive tasks.

The session underscored AI's transformative potential in AEC, addressing challenges like manual workflows, data silos, and compliance issues. With tools like Bentley Copilot, Victor, and ADOT Engineer, engineers are equipped to save time, enhance collaboration, and deliver projects with greater precision and efficiency.

Speakers

LL

LouisMartin Losier

-

Bentley Systems

RP

Richard Parker

-

Tyréns Group / AKT II

AS

Alexey Serous

-

Sweco

DE

Daniel Eng

-

Bentley Systems

KN

Kerkko Niemi

-

Granlund

PM

Peter Madlener

-

VIKTOR

RP

Rasmus Paatsalo

-

Granlund

SO

Simon Oster

-

Arcadis

================================================================================
SESSION 5: Session 3: Multi-Agent AI and Workflows
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

This industry trying to make transformation happen.

that all of us are living.

day by day

In my opinion, this is one of the most interesting sessions.

The whole world is talking about the agents.

and nobody knows what the agent is.

or maybe somebody knows and writes Wikipedia that this is the agent and that everybody is repeating it.

But in my opinion, the key thing is that whatever you call an agent, somebody calls an agent when you

Linda.

message to LLM and get some response back but.

I, I wouldn't stuck there too much.

What I would like to highlight is that

we are talking about

one of the biggest shifts in the history of

like modern

capital economy

250 years ago,

Adam Smith wrote a quite famous book, as many of you might know.

I said that labor

is kind of the profound unit.

of economy

That thing is changing now first time ever.

quite exactly 250 years ago. That book was published, and I hope that you take that with you.

when we start this great session with amazing speakers and what I really like with the session today here is that we have actually quite broad

group of people

We have both consultancies who are trying to navigate their way out of this business model changing and they don't actually know where they get. We have software company.

who comes from a completely different direction when the service market and software market where the service market is 15 times bigger globally, are actually merging and embedding.

And then we have even academia and research institutes bringing a bit different

angle to the whole discussion

So hopefully you enjoyed the session and uh we go to the first presentation and uh let's keep warm applause for

Petri Casare from Spe

Hm

Yeah

Hello, my name is Petrick Casare, and I work as a PIM software developer at SEO Finland, and I'm here to present you how we build our multi-8sent and Aalam-based platform that exposes our PMS and design data through a chat interface integrated into Microsoft and Autodesk tools.

And I'll focus on the architecture, how the agents work, and what we learned from the pilots.

There are some key points of this SECO.

back to the point. So in typical projects, design documentation, BMS data and project the informations are scattered.

across Rabbit, Autoca.

SharePoint, emails, and other legacy systems and finding anything requires a lot of manual search and often asking a senior colleagues about, have you done this before?

And this is especially in exceptional cases where our TEFL templates don't help.

And this leads to a slower workflows.

inconsistent solutions and high cognitive load for the designers.

So to address this, we defined 4 key requirements.

First, we need a unified access layer across Reit and Autoca models.

BMS and device data, documents, and other internal sources so that the users don't have to hunt across the systems.

And second, taxes must be natural language based, meaning that the designers can ask questions without deep novelist of the data models or where the information is stored.

And third, it has to be an enterprise grade on Azer.

It has to have good security.

governance, and integrated integrated into the micro Microsoft ecosystem.

And 4th, it needs to be an extensible so that we can easily add new agents, tools, skills, and data sources over time as the requirements evolve.

and this diagram solves the overall architecture from user to data.

First, the users interact through our player made WebA hosted on Azure App Service, and every request flows into the AA functions layer.

where the semantic kernel and the hand of model runs.

and there the orchestrator coordinates our three specialized agents Project, document, and instruction agent.

which talks talks to our Are databases and storages, while the GPT 4.1 by OI provides reasoning strictly through these control tools, and I know TPP 4.1 is really outdated at this point, but this proof of concept was using that.

4.1

And for that we can have a viable data in our databases. We use our

custom data pipeline.

that from the Acut and Revit databases to the our own Awa databases via a sync uploader.

So the semantic kernel lets us define the tools and skills, our agents can call, such as querying databases, generating documents, and it's also managing

and routing the via the hand of that performs the indent detection and task decompulsion and routes the parts to the right agents.

And this gives us the benefits versus the single agent approach that's, that this platform is much more modular. It's easier to extend an each agent have clear responsibilities.

Uh, we run a small set of specialized agents with clear roles, for example, the project agent that where is the structured project dataset, metadata, and associated documents in that project.

Document agent retrieves device specs, instructions, VA connections from the Azur Restores and indexes down to the individual clauses.

and the instruction agent is mainly for producing or operating descriptions, drafts by combining the document outputs.

that that ensures that the text stays grounded to the clause level data.

and each agent exposes

scoped tools to GPT 4.1 and the semantic kernel orchestrator picks up then and sickin system based on the user intent.

Uh, our data pipeline is built around 2 goals capture the design intent in a structured way and do it without slowing down the designers.

So the Rabbit and Autoca adding extracts the key content we need for the automation design.

device types, parameters, instruction, texts, and so on, and packetsows into a consistent hierarchy.

And to keep CAT tools responsive.

the add-ins don't upload the data to directly to the user. Instead they hand the payload to our background process so the designer doesn't feel any lack, and it's much more predictable.

and that uploader then pushes the data to the Azer through our secure APIs.

and this gives us the result that there's no manual data transfers that no per performance hit on revit or Autocat, and a consistent and close addressable datasets that our agents can query reliably.

From the user's point of view, everything happens in a one set window. A designer can type query-like list projects where the paints of ventilation and heat recovery, control and regulation has been done.

Then the semantic kernel interrupts the intent and decides which agents to involve.

Typically, project agent to scan the structured project data.

and maybe be documented and for the detailed instruction clauses.

and instruction agent if we need a formatted output.

and those agents then query the the databases and indexes and pulls the back the relevant.

projects plus they're operating descriptions and the GPT 4.1 10 stitches dose into a structured response.

So instead of hopping through the folders or asking colleagues, the user gets the answer in a second through the chat.

And we designed this solution to live inside the Microsoft and Autodesk ecosystems that are users are already working. On the Microsoft site, the chat front end is built on the pleasure of EA hosted on Azra Service and the authentication and authorization are handled through Aurra AD. So the users inherit their existing permissions.

and requests go to the as a functions layer where the semantic kernel with the handoff model runs.

and the project its content is stored in the Azra tables and storages.

And for the operations, the application insights provides us a service telemetry.

and the sec insists those detailed agent locks so we can trace

requests and dryads errors more quickly.

And on the outer desk side

we use our custom build Acu andre it add-ins filled with dotnet and APIs.

and these are

used on those startup pipelines to produce our AIs and those data.

and

those 10

wraps up the document data.

but the localies on objects.

that are asynchronouss background process then handles and pushes those to the databases.

and this bu-based approach gives us a predictable performance, consistent snapshots.

for the wearing

and resilient uploads even if the cat season ends.

The security and governance are built from the start.

All project Sata sits inside the tenant control Azure tables and blo storages, and they also the AD role assignments follow the users all the way through the agent layer. So no agent can retrieve more than the caller is entitled to.

On the observability side, we lock every agent handoff the tools they invoke plus the prompts and responses and those lock flows into the sack, which lets us to trace to end to end conversations.

detect errors quickly and debug with the full context.

and operationally we version each skill and agent and roll out the prompt or tool changes in states so we can monitor insects before broadening the deployment.

and we piloted this as a real working prototype, not as a mockup in live projects, but with that deliberately constrained scope. The goal was to validate the architecture, the agent handoff, model, and the data capture approach and not to optimize the performance metrics yet.

and what we observed early was a main equalities.

The user people could ask questions in natural language instead of navigating folders or remembering how the things were done previously.

And from the technical standpoint,

the most important insight was that the value did not come from any single agent but from the orchestration itself.

how agents data capture and design tool integration work together.

And this gave us the confidence that the architecture scales even before we scale the pilots themselves.

but they are still challenges to solve. First, the data quality and cabarets vary widely. Legacy projects and inconsistent naming.

directly affects what we can retrieve.

So the normalization and data discipline matters.

Second, there's the latency trade-off.

The more agents and tools we call, the richer is the answer, but the harder is to keep response time predictable.

And third, the LLams can hallucinate, so we have to keep moral grounded.

by constraining it to tool paste, retrieval and glossle references.

And finally

default the meta challenge that the AI field evolves so extremely fast.

Example, parts of our stack like the semantic kernel we used in this approach can become outdated quickly. As the newer agent framework emerges and simplifies the orchestration and reduces the boilerplate.

So we have to design, we have to design for the adaptability, not for, for, not for the frozen architecture.

And our roadmap focuses on three things richer content, smarter retrieval, and stronger platform. Firstly, we are adding these manufacturer data adapters, so the agents can reason over the vendor catalogs, device specs, and NaTSAStar internal documents. Secondly, we are implementing the full vector and rack pipelines with close-level embeddings and explicit grounding hooks.

inside the instruction agent. So the answers and generates generated text spaces tightly connected to the source clauses.

Third, we are raising the overall quality with the prompt evaluation.

regression tests and states rollouts. So the improvements don't introduce recrescents.

On the platform side. The next development step, it's the MCP server.

that becomes a clean surface uh to our co-pilot and teams so that they can call the same orchestrated tools once they integration is ready.

And finally, because the AI ecosystems evolve so quickly we are expecting to move from today's thematic kernel orchestration patterns toward to never ages and framework that reduces the boiler boilerplate, and simplifies the handoff and tool wiring much more.

And to close our 3 take waves.

The orchestrate a specialized agents on other functions using the semantic kernel and GPT 4.1.

We keep a reliable close level dataset.

flowing from the revi and AutoCat to our own Azure databases.

and we expose it through a pleasures at UI inside the tools our designers are already using.

Yeah, that's it. Thank you. And I'm happy to take your requests.

Yeah, thanks a lot, very, very interesting presentation. uh, as a reminder, uh, every one of you got 7:30 this morning, a SMS saying something about the live stream. So you can press the SMS link and then you get to this event, those web page, so you don't need to download any app, and you can ask questions there. So anybody who has any questions uh regarding the presentation. You can raise your hand and we can even hand out hand out microphone, microphone

uh.

to you. I believe there was

there was someone

right away

Uh, hello. Uh, I have a question regarding data security, so you are giving your data to charitabity, your LDLLum. So how do you manage that?

we basically we use those

we use the Microsoft Azurere Foundry and

we use those models that

proves us that they don't use the data we provide them in any

third parties or so on.

Yeah, we have one here in the, in the front, uh, I can ask in in between maybe then you mentioned about the evaluations as a future thing and and prompt related, but are you considering evaluating the, the outputs as well with the AI.

Yeah, there are very

large list of improvements we are planning to implement, implement this foghase ah

tool and

but yeah

OK, uh, and then from the front line, interesting to see some architecture like forming over time here. Um, do you have any, just not to put you on the spot, but like some, some use case where you use ACA data or rebi data for the user, any specific use case you can just highlights.

Uh, excuse me, can you? So data that comes from either AutoCat or Rebits for the user for these agents and use case for them getting data from the Reit model, let's say, um, prompting a specific questions and getting answers back. Is it like how many walls are in this rabbit model or what kind of use cases are there for the users?

Uh, well, basically, in this phase we build this for

the task that users can find.

relevant and old projects where they have already designed something very specific and

I remember when I was BMS designer that I had this difficulties when I have this something more specific need.

and then I could almost every time I ask my colleagues about that. Do you have designed this already. So this brings that

cat a little bit smaller that you can easily

ask on the chat interface and find this similar projects and use those as the templates and

yeah.

Yeah, we have one more at least on the uh

last line of the

of the audience.

the microphone there as well now

Hi, I'm Peter, uh, from Victor, um, I have a question regarding the roadmap. I have actually two questions. So you presented your roadmap, um, didn't contain a timeline. Can you give an indication on um how long this will take and uh the following question is how much is the impact for the company if the roadmap would be shorter.

Um

this roadmap mainly was for the bigger, bigger picture and it doesn't really have any real timeline at the moment.

uh this, this platform, it's now moving to the next development phase and the

the main parts that we are going to implement are still on the development.

Yeah, there are many questions. I, I was kind of expecting it and it will probably continue like this, but now we need to move on on the program, so please don't hesitate to conda Petri afterwards or even uh write the questions afterwards to the Ivanos app and we can take it, take it from there. But let's give a big applause uh once again for the quick touch base, yeah.

Thank you.

And then moving on, um, another angle a bit similar, but something different uh from one of the largest consultancies here in Finland, uh, Eins Group, uh, Janni Nevalainen, please give me a couple of.

Oh, hello everyone. Uh,

What if I told you that you could have a team of specialists working for you 24/7 on your project. Running calculations and validations, even without coffee breaks. While you focus on your design decisions.

Well, sounds

almost too good to be true. Maybe even like a science fiction.

My name is Yani Nevalanen. I work as a software developer from artists group.

and today I will tell you how much, uh how this multi-agent systems for automated engineering, uh, can take you there.

Now, let's start with the reality of our current workflow right now, structural engineering exists in silos. On one side, we have the big models. In the middle, we have the physics and calculation engines and on the other side we have the project data.

The problem is that these environments are disconnected.

To breach them, we act as human routers. We manually export BDF or an Excel sheet from one tool and retype those values into another. The static file exchange is the bottleneck of our industry.

Every time we reenter a parameter, we aren't just losing time. We are creating an opportunity for human error.

and ensuring that our data becomes stale the moment architectural model changes.

We've all been there. You build the perfect grasshopper script or Python tool, and it works beautifully until the software updates or the project requirements shift by 5%. This is the rigidity problem because these connections are hardcoded. They act as bridle bridges. They don't bend, they break.

We find ourselves in the automation trap.

where the engineers spent more time debugging legacy scripts than actually performing engineering design.

We accidentally traded our engineering hours for maintenance

uh permanently

Even when our scripts do work, they often hit the scalability wall.

Most automation to die today, relies on static logic.

Fixed if X, then y, that's built for one specific scenario.

The moment you need to swap a calculation engine or incorporate a new data source yours back to square one.

rewriting code

This creates the project silos because this integrations aren't aware of each other. The automation we built for Project A is ready, usable for both Project B. We aren't building knowledge base. We're building one of tools that die when the project ends.

And finally, we have the data bottleneck

We are still stuck in a relay race of heavy static files passing back and forth. Every time we export the file, we lose granularity, we lose version control, and we definitely lose uh ability for real-time collaboration.

This file burden is what prevents us from scaling.

To fix this, we need to move away from the spiritual tool dependent links toward a software neutral core where the data, not the file, is the source of truth.

Now in the old world, automation was brittle script. If the tool updated, the script broke.

In the new world, we use orchestration. We have a coordinator, a digital project manager that looks at an agent registry of specialists.

Now instead of writing a fixed path, the coordinator identifies the expertise needed for our specific intent and hires those agents on the fly.

This makes the system resilient. You can swap out a calculation engine in the registry without rewriting a single line of your workflow. And this also makes the dynamic workflows possible.

Now, as I said earlier, traditional ASA industry relies on this relay arrays manually passing heavy overseas, excels and be PDFs, but this is no longer a good option if we want to create dynamic workflows using agents. Now, we are replacing that fragmented workflow with the PCMS.

which stands for the Building Content Management System. Think of it as a shared context context. Every agent sits around this round table. And unlike staticI file, the PCMS is granular. It tracks individual parts and the versions of the pin model in a database.

To interact with it, we use MCP, a universal handshake that allows an AI to browse the database dynamically. It fetches only what is needed

task attended, no more, no less.

And finally, the LLM acts as the bridge. It takes the human command, no matter how it's delivered and translates into precise data queries needed to fuel the machine. It maps the data into our engineering tools and most importantly, it closes the loop. It takes the raw output and pushes it back into the PCMS. And now this is the part where engineers stops being a beta entry clerk and starts being the designed pilot supervising.

uh a verified intelligence system.

Now,

here we can see the brain of the operation, the coordinator, agent.

When a government is given the coordinator performs a triage. It doesn't just guess, it queries our agent registry. Sort of like a yellow pages of expertise. It uh identifies with specialized agents are available.ex their capabilities and tools and performs a dynamic handoff. It sends a structure of work order to the experts, waits for the results, and then decides if the user's in

t ent is fully satisfied or if another handoff is required to finish the loop.

So how do agents interact with the data. So we use dedicated PCMS agent that acts as a gatekeeper to our database. By using MCP, this agent can see into the project called the dynamically. Instead of downloading a massive 3D model. It performs a part-level updates. It can fetch one beam, update it reinforcement, and track its status from

d ra ft to verified

Now this creates a surgical version controlled environment where every change is tracked back to a specific agent action.

Uh, the technical backbone of the solution is decoupled architecture. Now traditionally, you needed the local BIM license to be opened to run a script.

Here, the work happens in the cloud.

The PCMS acts as an a synchronous hub.

allowing agents to work in the background.

These moves us from black box automation where you hope the script works to a glass box system where every calculation

and data fetch is locked, time stamped, and fully auditable.

Now, one of the biggest hurdles in AI adoption is trust. To solve this, black, black box problem even further. We separate orchestration from engineering. We don't ask an LLM gas rear areas. We use it to prepare the data for a calculation agent that runs strictly deterministic formulas.

And to go even further, design can go through a validation agent, a digital peer reviewer which uses a hybrid model. First, it runs at deterministic math to ensure the results don't violate, uh, uh, any physics or euro codes, for instance, and second, it uses LLM to perform a contextual check against Pro standards. This creates a safety lock.

The final 3D model won't even see the data until this digital auditor gives the green light.

We aren't just automating the work we are automating quality assurance.

Now, before we look at the small demonstration. Here's the bird's eye view. We move from intent to a verified 3D model through a closed loop of agent to agent communication. The engineer provides the in-depth and the system provides the proof.

Now

here's the treaty view of our PI model stored in the PCMS and on the right, we have our PTM assistant.

Now in this example, we communicate with agents, uh, just by typing into the chat. But of course we could have another interfaces as well.

So with the BCMS we can facech data at the OPEC level and see easily the current up to-date information.

Now, let's go in further. Let's first check the status on design for floors 124. Our agents filtered the request and returned the status information back to the user. Data is visualized using 3D model and different graphs.

Now, this is one example, but we can go even further, we can combine tools. And for instance, we can compare planned schedule to the status. This way we can create the dynamic for workflows on the fly by combining these tools and agents.

And here we can see which elements are, for instance, delayed, and we can see the conflicts, uh, between the actual status and and the planned one, and then take action to it.

And finally, uh, one interesting tool we can also, for instance, evaluate the environment impact and uh and the example we calculate the CO2 emissions for the floors between 1 to 4, and our agent gives us the total carbon footprint, but also the individual components on these floors and how they contribute to this. So you can see the big picture and the detailed breakdown.

n quite easily

So this was just a small demonstration. There are, of course, a lot of other tools that we can integrate here and we didn't actually hear save any data, but for instance, the CO2 calculation was done on the fly, on the fly.

Now

let's talk about the magic of the system. Headless scalability. Traditionally, your speed is limited by your hardware and your licenses. How many instances of your modeling software or a FEM tool, can you run at once? This is where the infrastructure magic happens. We, when we have decoupled the math from the desktop. Your engineering tools now live as headless services in the cloud.

While you work, hundreds of agents can be designing and verifying components in the background. And because of BCMs acts as the broker. You don't need a heavyVP model to be open.

uh, to run the calculations.

So, and the loop only closes when modeling software detects verified flag, and then it makes the final geometry into the model.

So we have traded idle loading bars for 24/7 asynchronous productivity.

Uh, to wrap this up. This isn't just about faster scripts. It's about fundamental shift. We are moving from being human routers, manually moving data between software, becoming data design pilots.

In this new paradigm, the AA AI manages the data mess and the math mapping while the human remains the final professional validator. Our next steps involve uh combining carbon and cost agents to make sustainability, a real-time design metric. And of course, expanding to other design domains.

Uh, we are finally building design process that is as intelligent as the structures we create. Thank you.

Thanks a lot, uh, very, very interesting.

presentation, uh, hands up again for the questions, but I can maybe start to get the microphone to the right person. So are you building all this in-house, what you're showing me, yeah.

Yeah, what size of a team you are having to do all this. Uh, well, most of them, John here doing the development, but of course we use like uh a lot of open-source tools and uh and this uh frameworks. So, so we're not building everything from scratch. Yeah, that is probably very smart. There we have at least a hand, so go ahead.

the mic yeah hello and thank you very much for the wonderful presentation. One question for me is, uh, is this tool, this is a system already available for uh usual engineers at Einore.

Uh, well, currently this is in a pilot stage, so it's, it's not in a very broad use, but of course, uh, we developed these tools in order that they could be expanded in a larger sense. And, and of course, like I, like I showed there that uh uh there was this chat interface, but of course we can integrate this tool into the design programs as well, and

we're so that they worked there and of course it depends on the use case. But, but yeah, let's see how it goes. Still at the very early stage of this process. Thank you very much.

There we have our next one in the middle on the right.

right side from here

Uh, hello. Hello Sanre from Halo.

Uh, what experience do you have about um

the AI understanding that implicit geometric rel relationships between the elements may structural design is more, more defined, but maybe in an architecture model.

Uh, well, well, uh, like in, in BCMS we have this database that stores the relations between the elements, structural elements.

and then, then, as I said that uh we don't use LLMs to guess, but we, we use this different deterministic tools for for a lot of cases. So mainly, mainly we actually use LLM just to translate the human intent as a work order or input data for the tools that we use.

in the background

Thank you

Hello, uh thank you for the presentation. My name is Saad. Uh, my question is that when you talked about the licenses uh about different softwares and the headless mode.

So my question is that many companies and organizations have over the years developed many workflows that are inside those softwares like CAD or Rivet, so many companies have their own propriety workflow. So how do we then connect such systems to those workflows. And the second question is that the same desktop applications like Riveit or whatsoever, they have spent years to hone and mature their technology for certain calculations that the LL

M s or some tools that open source might not be able to give the same capabilities. So how do we make sure that we get the same capabilities.

with our system like the sort of agentic systems. Thanks.

Oh well, there's a lot of, a lot of questions. But, but yeah, so as I said mentioned earlier, a little bit like we can of course create like uh integration from different tools that we use currently, and they can send the data to the PCMS and then we can fetch from there. So we can create different connectors uh around the PCMS as well.

to, to fetch the data back to the designs of the design, design software back and forth, and then we can use agents for several several things, but at least, at least, uh, we have quite a lot of different small calculation tools that we have made on our own. So, so that's why this came up that would be nice to implement this kind of system that the agents can combine and use these tools and like create this dynamic workflows and then fetch the information from

the Molo Strait where what is actually the data source.

Yeah, there is another one we have time for at least 1 or 2 questions more so.

Thank you so much for amazing presentation. My question is like, in your multi-agent systems, uh, have you considered this specialist agents to be as big as the orchestra's agents or can be smaller models that consume less resources, so

Yes, yes, yes. We, we, we, of course, like uh every agent can have a different model. And of course, it makes sense like if we recognize that this, this agent doesn't actually need such large LLM model because it gets like the work order in a structured format, for instance. So, so, and then of course there's always a possibility to use even local LLM models for, for some cases. So that's something

to consider

Yeah, we can take a short question. We had one hand here, uh, in the front of the audience and please uh write your questions if you had any. today eventus up I thinkiannian answered them there, but go ahead. Thank you for the presentation. I was wondering, um, did you have a problem linking all the data between the different sources? Was that a part of the project or?

well, that, well, creating the BCMS was actually a different project and we just combined it here and so, so there's a lot of work in that there as well like connecting.

uh, making connectors from different, uh, design software that can send the data to the PCMS and creating the data structure and the interfaces as well. So, so, yeah.

I, I didn't have a time to talk about that, that one in detail because this was considered more more on the agents.

Thanks a lot, Tanni. Now let's give another applause for a very

interesting presentation

All right, then we move to the um

academia part of the session number 3 today and uh directly from Germany and uh

one side's the tape what I heard, but Monamili from Frauhofer, let's give big a pause.

Hello. Yes, thank you for the introduction. My name is Muna Mulli. I'm an architect and PhD student working in the field of

building integrated photovoltaics at the front of Research Institute for Solar Energy Systems in Freiburg in Germany, and today I would like to introduce you to my current research that is about multi-agent systems for design and construction optimization.

and the research is done in the context of a bigger project where we, together with six other umanhofer Institutes investigate the automation of the whole renovation, renovation process and for some uh process steps they are already highly automated solutions as we see today as well and for others, we uh develop solutions.

but what we are showing here in this um process is an outline, the outline is optimal research process and it continuous workflow of worksteps and everything is clearly defined. Dependencies are clear, interfaces are perfectly interdisciplinary work works perfectly, but um

if we look into reality, this is uh

not often the case, and often we know that processes take much longer and the dependencies are complex. The actor interaction is problematic and the topic intersection is not very clearly defined, and this ends up in delays, um, and also exploding costs and so on, so this is something we want to work on.

and our goal is to examine where we can optimize those processes, and our method is to approach this topic to first, um, we define the processes, we formalize them and analyze them, and for that we use uh knowledge graphs. That's uh um method where with edges and notes tasks and relationships are very clearly defined and in a, um, comprehensible way for a machine, not only for a

human.

Yeah, and if we talk about processes, there are a lot of sources that store information about processes. Of course there's literature and know-how. There's also laws and standards that um,

have a lot of information on those, but there's also, um, it was mentioned before, the experience of people that have built something like this before and we're thinking this is a very valuable information. We want to look into. So we looked into how our process is documented and there's different ways they're documented, but one thing is that um

kind of everyone does their meetings and they are meeting minutes where it's documented what's discussed and what are the next steps. So we first decided to look into those documentations.

and our proposal to approach this big goal of process optimization is to automatically analyze the design and construction processes first on their optimization potential. and then you see a bit of a preview of what is the current state, what like we do as an analysis and yeah, we will come back to that.

So what we think is our new contribution to this process optimization is that with automation, um, and an automated analysis, we can be very fast and we can influence the process while it's running. So, um

also on top of that, we can be very individual, so there's no just research about generally optimizing some kind of processes, but it can be during your processes running, our goal would be to create an agent that is analyzing and gives you um

suggestions constantly on how you can optimize your process.

So I would like before I go into more detail what we actually did is, uh, give you a bit of a context. There's of course a lot of ways of optimizing processes. There's, for example, we are working with modular facade systems so you can optimize the process by prefabrication or something like this, so that's an option, but you can also, um, formalize processes.

BIM is one concept for defining how data is transferred and so on. And also there is the standard of business process modeling and notation. You see a diagram here on the

left that um is a standard where processes are defined and

formalized, but this is a digital way, but it's still made for humans for us to understand, to read, to analyze, and our ways that we are introducing this graph structured knowledge base, which is made for rather machines to understand and um this is the main, one of the main difference. Another one is that one, the one diagram is a static one. We have a flexible network where we can retrieve information that we need

anytime and depending on what we need at the moment. Also those knowledge graphs are more and more used for AI as a base, uh, for analysis. That's also a reason.

So now I was telling you that we want to look into a process documentations and one to transfer them into our knowledge graph. So how do we do that?

We built this multi-agent pipeline for in our case the multi-agent pipeline means that the agents are working with each other and not connected to any Adobe program or something, but, um, this pipeline has 3 steps. There's, first of all, the seudonymisation because for us data security is very important. Um, we want to reach out to architectural officers and maybe that's a very German thing, but they are very afraid of

security and their privacy and for us as a research institute, this is also an important topic.

And then we have a second agent that structures the information and a third one that gives our knowledge graph a structure in terms of an ontology.

So our um workflow looks like this, so there's um the pseudonymize pseudonymizer, the first agent, you get the meeting protocols into that.

then you receive the seudonymized documents together with mappings and we have a human in a loop here to be very sure that everything is uh all sentences data is removed, then we have, yeah, that's the first one. The second one is the structured table generator.

No, it generates structured tables, and we have an ontology mapper, so we would go through them now in detail. So the pseudonymisation agent is responsible for detecting all the sensitive entities in those meeting data. So, um, and we are converting each of the documents into this pseudonymized representation. So the information gets passed from the PDF through this PDF reader in chunks

and by this chunks then it gets passed through the workflow. We developed two methodologies to, um,

yeah, find the entities we want to replace. First one, we use an LLM that was pre-trained on, especially this task.

that we, even if it was, it was for German and it was trained for the task, but we wanted to have two different methods and compare them. We also use um a normal LLM, and we run both of them locally because we want to have the, uh, want to know what's going on with our data. We want to be in charge of that no data is going anywhere. Um, yeah, so we do all this first step locally and only when the data is

pseudonymized, we use bigger LMLL lamps and agents. So now we are in the 2nd step. We take those protocols and these PDF documents are then with our system formed and there we also use Judge PD 4 and 5. That was the state, uh, when we developed the tool. Um

and we here give in a system prompt that is asking to extract the information in a structured way. So we are asking for a certain tasks, OK, what, what has been discussed, which tasks who is responsible for the task? When was the task scheduled? When was it actually executed and all those kinds of information we want to retrieve, and that's what we do here. And, uh, I haven't mentioned the pedantic AI that is our

um

agent that controls if the response that we get from the AI is is validated to our schema so that we have a clean data structure, and here we want to have structuredd Jason tables, and they need to be in a

straight in this format.

And then in the last step, um, we also developed two methodologies. We have already the structured information, so the main part is done, but we would like um for a knowledge graph we need, we need um

clear structure and we use for that an ontology. An ontology is here the kind of dictionary where everything is defined. Each word that we use to describe is defined, and we use here the ontology that is called Internet of Construction processes ontology, which was developed by the Avitiha Ahn, the university. He notes speaker at the very end of this conference and um this ontology functions here

as a structure for our knowledge graph with all the data.

So if that was very technical and you couldn't or you might have followed, but I want to give you also a bit of an example on that. So you have here on the very left the PDF and you see it's in German, but it doesn't matter what's written there, but in orange you see the tusk and blackened the name. And then below that, you see the pseudonymized text where the actors were placed in green, so there's now written Actor 1 and the task as well. And then you see the agent

structures the information, so you have on the left all this like task, actor and so on, and you have the information sorted to it. So here we already have the structure that we want to know. And on the very right side you see how this knowledge graph looks like, so you have at the beginning in blue always the name of the entity which comes from the ontology and then the information.

Yes, now we have this well structured data. So what do we do with it? There's a lot of options. We for now focus on um to, we wanted to have first diagrams, time analysis, and conflict detections and, um, yeah, we are on the first steps on using the knowledge graph.

So we decided to have those for um parameters we want to analyze and represent this duration, the length is uh which is shown by the length, the dependencies, actors amount, and conflicts. And here you see still a sketch of or like one first result that we run, we were of course tested a lot of protocols and so on, but from the visual visualization of the analysis

we are currently doing that, and yeah, you can see here the different parameters that we outline.

And what we're actually doing at the moment as well is this um transferring this to a web app that we developed um, we, uh, were you in the end, you can upload your PDF and then one click you get your diagram. And because we want to use that for all kinds of things we want to, for example, have different focuses. So we have a focus on the process. So now you see here the processes with their different names and how they're connected, but you could also

focus on the actor. So you want to know, OK, I'm responsible for doing this task, so

what else do I have to do? So one actor can be, oh, what are my tasks? So relation to the actor or relation to information. Information is given from one task to the other, so it's very important that uh where the information is needed, so we want to focus on that. Just as an example, we are currently developing that you see it's a work in progress, but um all of those things we can do with our knowledge graph.

And as a bit of a um our coming back to our vision, what we want to create, of course, now we are looking into those protocols because we think it's very valuable and a way to unlock this data that people have already all architectural officers have them without even transforming something. They don't need to, yeah, do much and just hand us the PDFs and we can do something with it, but in the future, of course we want to look into more

different information sources to build a real profound um

knowledge base, knowledge graph, so that we can use that for an NI that analyzes the process on the run and gives you optimization, um,

yeah

Introductions. Yeah, I think that's it from my side. Thank you very much.

Yeah, thanks a lot, Mona. You can

stay, stay there and I can, I can take this side of the stage, but yeah, hands up for the questions, uh, then again, but I can ask you first when we maybe wait for the.

audience to get the microphone, um, as a research institute, uh, is this project open source or is it to be commercialized or like what is the concrete output now when going forward um.

at the moment we, yeah, we need to develop a strategy for that, but the idea is to, of course, we do mostly our research needs to be public in the end, but we also have the case that if this would be a very um promising idea then we build a startup and this is going to be something that brings it on the market or we collaborate with um companies, tech companies, and

developers you see this as a prototype where as a research developed, but to bring this as an app we could also collaborate. So there's multiple options.

Yeah, there we have a question on the last row, uh, in the corner, but I can see.

thank you for your great presentation. My question is, uh, if you are goal is just to extract the knowledge graph, um, uh, would, would you just use LM to do that, like, how is the your in like a process compared to just let IM to create it, is it a benefit or trade-off between reliability and cost or something like that.

Um, we use this knowledge graph and we do all of those steps in between also to um be transparent and know what each step is doing. So we want to have this knowledge graph in the end also as a um

network where we store data and because it's a way where the data's really defined and the connections between the informations are defined in a way that LLM, for example, can easily extract the information that's

what we're using it for.

So it's more stabilized this way.

Yeah, it's a way of also a bit of ad that you don't need to run the whole process all the time, but you can store information in this knowledge graph, and we can extend this knowledge graph and then in the end have a lot of processes and the information from that in one knowledge graph, but you don't want to see all of them all the time, but you want to have a bit of the same you have an agent as they showed before, where you ask a specific question or you want to have a different aspect analyzed and

you can refer to the knowledge graph as a base.

Thank you.

There is at least one more question if I so right a bit shy hand coming up but uh.

that was I, I'm Oscar, a postdoctoral research fellow from Tampa University. Thank you for this presentation it was excellent, and I'm really glad that we are finally talking about knowledge graphs and linked building data. There's never enough discussion about that, this topic, but the presentation was quite a technical, uh, could you also summarize like a key business aspects of benefits that this kind of a system could have. Yeah, thank you. Um, I think we, we are

in close contact with architectural firms. We are doing interviews round tables, and so on to evaluate our work and see what um the firms are actually asking for and, um, we see on the one hand a lot of the questions that were discussed in the last two talks that we are looking for files and want to know something about formal processes. So we approach this a bit from a different angle because we also see under um as a second thing that

there's so much information stored there, not only in the separate files but in this continuous workflows, and we can learn so much from experienced architects and we can of course talk to all of them, but we can also like with data analysis, try to extract this knowledge from the stored data that is lying around, so this is a bit where we hope to have a benefit then for future projects.

Yeah

OK, thanks

All right, let's give a big applause for Monamilion Crownho.

And then last but not least, we, we get to the software when their perspective and uh let's welcome to the stage, Kim Newberry and Henry Pican from Trimble.

OK, we're competing for the longest title of the the session. So let's see how we do. But we're going to talk about multi-agents, a bit about collaboration and we want to actually explain that a bit at scale in construction design, but let's dive into it and

first, some introductions. So my name is Kevin Ebadi. That's how you pronounce it but her Nyberg and all kinds of weird variants of that. Uh, I joined Techla back in'91 and then we were quite by Trimble in 2011. So, I've been doing this job for quite some time. I'm leading the technology unit, I have a background in computer science, so

and then uh I have a wide variety of interests in this presentation we're going to talk about AI. We'll leave the other stuff out. And I have a nickname, Chief Gadget Officer. So smile, you're on Candid Camera.

There you go. And Andrew.

Yeah, my name is Henry Mulder. So, uh, actually a recent name changed, got married, so, yes.

Um.

bit of a junior, uh, compared to Kim, so joined 14, um, being doing some research here and there, uh, both on the university side and then for Techla uh products are now expanding a little bit, and also on that side, working now with the adoption of some agenttic workflows. OK.

Cool. Anyway, let's start with Doliator AI Slop productivity and construction. It's a bit like the Finnish economy, quite flat.

Maybe it isn't that bad, but anyway, almost, almost. So what could be some of the reasons. There's a cognitive tax in AEC and ASA software.

So engineering is difficult. That's why we're here. And also the tools can be quite complex. There's quite a lot of responsibility and the outputs of these tools. Now they have been built over the years. So there's information overload in the products. A lot of functionality, uh, we see software silos.

and then also labor scarcity. I mean that's a fact that we'll have a 30% less people doing the work in the next 5 years.

So we need to do something about this.

And one thing is that agents can help.

So going back a bit of time, I looked in my archives. I found this yellow paper. This was 3 years ago. We started exploring what you could do with Chachipety 30 being out and we had the Techla Open API. So we played around a little bit with, could we actually have chatchiPT create some code based on just public information and because our documentation had been public. That was actually possible. The results weren't that good. I could maybe create some beams live on stage 3

years ago, but that was about it.

But yeah, what are we doing with Argenta K? How will that solve the cognitive attacks and what are we doing?

Yeah, so.

we start with

content filtering and summarization. So,

um, agents can filter noise, summarize relevant project information, the surface relevant information to reduce the overload. Um, many software already tried to address this. We have many features that provide filtering, but so far it's rule-based uh with agents, it is pretty straightforward. We've seen in many presentation here. Uh, force multiplier maybe which we might focus a bit on in this presentation, so agents can't really automate repetition

tasks provide expert assistance, uh, enabling teams to achieve more. And of course, there's the scarcity of job uh related things. So bridge the talent gap, um, you're a specialist in your own field, but not maybe the tool itself, so it's nice to get up to speed with the help of an agent.

And then interrupt uh autonomous data and Interop um in our field, there's a lot of different formats and a lot of different software. So multi-agent systems, they can really handle uh data exchange between different tools with minimal interaction, uh, breaking down software silos, some of the examples that we're going to show here as well.

Before we jump into the actual case, um,

send me technical, not so technical, maybe, uh, example, um,

Most of our agent the applications follow is that we have an agent orchestration and within that orchestration we have many different kinds of agents, uh, can be modeling, drawing, uh, developer, help, uh, things.

So it goes through uh orchestration selecting what we need. Uh, we have a context search, we have a uh Richard will augmented generation and within there there is model context. There's knowledge based information and we have state updates, um,

yes, state updates, uh, that refer to the actual tooling and the model within, uh, so we're looking at the state, what's inside there, and are we using that advantage

We have chain tasks solving, so not going through uh one thing, but based on the prompt, we can do 10 or 20 different tasks within the one chain, so it's creating an initial step workflow, and then we have tool calling and execution. Many people talk about MCP. Well, that's something that is very good for us as well for many applications so we can interact with the available APIs. Um, so,

it's a protocol. There's other protocols as well for this, uh, available. And

lastly, we have an observation loop. So after each step we might go back and alter the entire step process, so we actually make something different based on what do we see. So we might do a state update, see what's happening maybe in a 3D model and we see it, OK, it's not going according to plan, so we make a little adjustments and we try to finalize, uh, the job.

Not only

it is just that workflow. It's more about the data, so not a prompt, not only the architecture, um, in the best case, we're working with multimodal information, uh, as you can see here, uh, contexts can include, uh, bin information, different, uh, model geometry, lighting conditions. There can be scans and information from the job site materials, spaces, uh, rules, um, and skills, even employed by the us

ers through an agentic um applications. You saw that earlier even in some presentations as well. Uh, but then,

examples

Easy start, uh, assistance we can see them already in most of the applications they can provide information on how to use the software, um,

destructures is an excellent candidate for this. It has a last feature set, so it is

it will take some time to learn how to use it efficiently. So the yellow paper turned into this last year.

so we've seen that as well in some presentations today where code generation based on APIs and then one important issue here is the, the safety here. So we don't execute any code unless the user looks through it and and then executes it. So unless it's a very sandboxed environment, but in this case we we

let the user check it out and then perform the action. Yeah, yeah, and these are on top of some of our offerings, modeling offerings, so you can basically wipe code using our own API offering and execute called real time or scripts and see how does it execute and then you can take it to your own projects and continue from there as an example. That's pretty interesting. What if we want to do something automatically? Do we have something for that?

Maybe here

So

um

do what I mean

And the, here you can see in the interface we don't have any buttons available and um

I'll just give a prompt here that, uh, hey,

here's import something from Connect, uh, SketchUp reference, then create a two-story building, detail it, and then create a drawing.

And, and we start this, we start getting a reference coming from another software, then we start getting automated modeling operations on the fly, creations of beams and column structure.

We start getting details being put into the structures as well and ends up in uh creation of a

uh general arrangement drawing.

And then I'm happy with it in this case for the demo and say let's export it to the downstream users. So I asked for the collaboration, and I can see that, hey

it's available as a drawing.

Now

So now I, now I can become a detailer. Yes, no, not really. More detailed examples is that we have more context from the model, so working with an existing model doing some heavy detailing, so Kim is working here and he has no idea what's happening. Uh, from the structural engineer perspective.

and voila, we have a connection design generated in in that sense, in a pretty vast uh model context.

So I just need to speak English to it and.

I can do detailing, but do what I mean, that's the thing. Yeah.

Moving into something

very cool examples from SketchUp. So you've been working with your model for a client as an example, and then

you know that the client is in Hawaii or, or some in a sunny space, I could be in vacation, that space, it looks so nice. So creating a rendering really into an existing scene, a geometry on top of it, uh, so you can go with the client and show that, hey, this is the vibe that you can get from, from that place that we're going to maybe design from the architecture point of view.

So yeah, I'm behind the scenes, there's quite a lot of interesting things happening, not just getting from a 2D picture to, to rendering in in less than a minute, but we also use the depth information other hints for the rendering or for the AI-based rendering, and we have tried out different models, so that's one example. Yeah.

Another very cool example, um, from the sketchUp family is that you just generate an image, uh AI generated image and then

a cigar sofa and this system generates the images and converts, it, it in actual 3D mesh that you can import into the model. So as an object, so that's pretty cool.

And like most of this stuff is available either for users in some labs, programs and such, so, so there are already there and in that sense for the most parts.

And uh

Kim, you have added some extra content here, I see. Uh, yeah, I was a little bit inspired by the keynote this morning where we talked about the keynote speaker talked about quantity takeoff and sure enough, that's actually something we did last year as well, and this very popular, I think doubled our sales in December thinking of doubling yet another. So basically automating repetitive work, and so this kind of

already as a product available, um, so I thought that I'll add that

and then

just a reminder that AI is not just about LLM like we heard this morning as well. So this example of used in computer vision. So uploading uh 2D floor plan for processing and then we actually first kind of highlight where the walls are.

and then from that we can generate vectors. So what, what are the rooms or the spaces, or what is the outline? Where do we have walls, windows, doors, and uh

we create a vector format of that, so then we can actually go and edit that vector format and then like in less than a minute, you go from 2 day floor plan to a full 3D model that you can then import into your favorite BIM tool.

And this is already integrated part of the agenttic tools, so it's available there if you ask it from the prompts.

Yeah. Yeah, you can go to labs tremble.com to try out some of the new things that we are working on. Anyway, uh, let's talk a little bit about gentech real quick. So

building this agentic workflow, we could see from a presentations before that there's quite a lot of things that they have to consider just building this and multiple data sources interop frameworks, human in the loop. How do you do that? and so on.

Deploying at scale, deploying something like that globally because we don't want to repeat this process for 100 plus products at tremble. I mean, we showed you now some early examples, and some of them were built with the same framework. Some of them were kind of one-offs as we were experimenting with things, but we are unifying that towards thegentic platform.

So

another thing we're doing, uh, where we have built an agent studio that we have using internal to build these agents, but we are already working also with some key customers now that they can take our Agentic studio, which has done interface to our APIs and tooling and so on so that they can then create agents and agent workflows that connect to their enterprise software so that they don't have to think all about about all of those hard problems before that.

And one business case for this, we launched this Tremble agentic platform last year at Trimble Dimensions, and we had an early business case with Hansel Phelps where they calculated that by just uh doing submittal review for them, it could save up to $3 million a year if it says 150 minutes per sub submittal.

And with that

I think we could do a summary, Andrew. So what, what have you learned?

Yes, and I think we'll be a force multiplier, um.

your natural interface for tools and data.

Um

trusted partners

may be coming there

Um, when there's a human in the loop, uh, with these systems. I think we're still at that point, we'll end with a short testimonial. I was had just a dimension showed uh the modeling system to Chris Kiak a power user.

but you have a QR code here. But if you actually are a user of

Telo products, for example, and you have maybe an available license, you can

get the TMA, the models assistant, that was shown quickly. Uh, you can, you can get the hands of, of that and try it out if you want. Yeah. Anyway, so kind of very spontaneous reaction after I gave the first demo a couple of months ago, uh, recorded on the same glasses, so.

uh, although, sorry, we need to get audio.

OK. How do I get back? OK.

So that right there is going to change how detailing and design is done like the licensing model is going to be like everything like UI design everything. The whole, the whole way that you interact with cyclo structures is going to be completely different. It's like game changing.

So what are we talking about? We're talking about this. Yeah, so being able to human human language type in what is it that I'm watching, whether I'm querying or having to do actions in the model and on the drawing, seeing the drying examples is also really awesome, of being able to, without having to understand all the technical switches and finding out where in the UI I got to do something. I'm doing everything in one central location and that usability onboarding, everything

would be completely different.

So I was, he actually started talking. I was like, hold on, let me record this. I need it in my presentation later. So with that, thank you for your attention and maybe have a few minutes for questions. Yeah, thank you.

Yeah, definitely, uh, couple of minutes, minutes left of this session. Thanks a lot for the very interesting, uh,

presentation and hands up, uh, again, if you, if you have a

question, we can, we can start from there. But just to, uh, one question from my side to our line. So these are partly in production, partly in prototype phase for existing customers. Is that correctly understood? Yeah, yeah, they came out last year and then modeling assistant is now in the labs. It's in the labs program. So if you're interested to join, you can actually get it, um, and, and install it for our production version of deconstructions and the sketchUp tools also they, they

some of them are in labs, some of them are in production, and then the floor plan to 3D is also Trimble labs. So if you hit labs tremblecomm, then you can go and see what we have there.

Jonas also from Tampare University, doctoral.

researcher. So you talked about the validation.

Um, so in structural side, I think it's quite important to get it right. Absolutely, are you using some tools to do this kind of validation or I'm asking that how much is like already built tools that you have to do the validation and how much is like something else.

If you can answer this question.

you talk about like structural validation.

For, for what we are providing at the moment. We don't have structural validation embedded in these systems. So right now we're focusing on example cases that we get that is the is what the user wants. Is it right? What comes as an output after the user has checked the correctness, and we're even now at that stage that the agents can provide actually the good outputs, but not yet at that stage.

OK, thank you

Any other questions, uh, there is a hand in the, in the middle.

Thank you for great presentation. I'm really curious about your statement about the new interface, uh, like from this highly technical to natural language, uh, interface.

Uh, question from end user, what do they need to learn? What is, like, do they need to be, to be able to express their intention eloquently to the LF to the agent, so basically, you know, it's just like the shifting of expertise, what do you think is important for to be learned as an end user in the future. We can take that. So, yeah, I think you still need to be a domain expert. You need to know the terminology and what you want to do, so it's not like just pick anyone off

of the street or me to become the detailer. I think there is a lot of value in the in the just knowing the trade, uh, just like with developers, I mean, sure everybody can wipe code now, but should I, would I go on a white-coated production environment with my sensitive data, maybe not. So I think it's the kind of same thing here that, that you still need to have the domain expertise to get good results. I mean, we can do cool demos, uh, create Christmas

trees and all of that, uh, with structural steel, but then when you actually want to do something that is constructible and so on, then you still need to be able to express yourself, but you don't have to go in the menu and hunt and peck, or you can do filtering that might the user interface might not enable it, but through this APIs you can actually create a filter that then does what you want to do and, and finds the objects that you want to do. So, so it's a new way for expert users to get

even more out of our systems. And then also a way to onboard new users to, to fairly complex software.

And we can say one sentence to that where over time that you get, then we need to. I would wrap up. I like to see when you're a domain expert that you can really thrive in your domain expertise more, not going years into some specific software and really trying to grasp it. So instead you can spend that time on your domain expertise.

Yeah.

OK. Amen, thanks a lot to Kim. uh and um

and

Patrick and yeah, uh, I've got confused with the mold. It's whatever, but uh, not the first name changing, but thanks a lot for great person there. So let's give big up lost.

All right, uh, this session is now over. We will move to the coffee break, which is the last coffee break for the day, uh, followed with the final session in this, uh,

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "Multi-Agent AI and Workflows" session at AI in AEC 2026 brought together industry leaders to discuss the transformative role of AI in architecture, engineering, and construction. Kalle Valkama set the stage with Adam Smith's historical insights on labor, emphasizing AI's potential to redefine economic paradigms. Petri Kasari from SVECO Finland showcased their Azure-based multi-agent platform, which integrates BIM software with Microsoft and Autodesk tools to streamline workflows. The platform employs modular agents—Project, Document, and Instruction—to retrieve data, generate documents, and ensure consistency. Kasari highlighted the role of Azure Functions and semantic kernel in orchestration while addressing challenges like data normalization, latency, and adaptability. Jani Nevalainen from AINS Group introduced automated engineering workflows, including a validation agent for quality assurance, environmental impact evaluation, and modular design optimization. Mona Muehlich from Fraunhofer presented a pseudonymization agent and ontology mapper for extracting structured knowledge graphs from meeting protocols, enabling real-time process optimization and conflict detection. Kim Nyberg and Henri Pitkänen from Trimble demonstrated their Agentic platform, featuring tools like a floor plan to 3D model converter, SketchUp's AI-driven 3D mesh creation, and rendering capabilities. A case study with Hensel Phelps illustrated substantial cost savings through automated submittal reviews. The session highlighted AI's ability to enhance productivity, bridge talent gaps, and enable dynamic, scalable workflows, offering a glimpse into the future of AEC innovation.

Speakers

HP

Henri Pitkänen

-

Trimble

JN

Jani Nevalainen

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

KN

Kim Nyberg

-

Trimble

MM

Mona Muehlich

-

Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE

PK

Petri Kasari

-

Sweco

KV

Kalle Valkama

-

Tyréns

================================================================================
SESSION 6: Session 4: AI Technology and Systems
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

For this session, I will be on you.

So Sonia wasn't able to join, so I, I try to be as good as Sonia would have been.

So I have a small, small, uh, like this kind of, uh, storyline story for you, considering what kind of season we are now in, entering.

Uh, so, um, the team of Seone is AI Tech and System. Uh, it might sound highly technical, but it addresses a very fundamental idea.

How we harness information and make it flow seamlessly through our project using AI. In many ways, information is the lifeblood of modern AIC practice. Yet we all know challenges. Our data is also often fragmented across different tools and stages. Important knowledge, it stucks in silos and critically in inside does arrive too late to make a difference.

The 4 talks in this session were chosen to show a coherent narrative of how new AI-driven technologies can overcome these challenges.

Together they will answer crucial question How can advanced AI system help us structure, interpret and apply information more effectively across very diverse AC AEC use cases.

The first presentation, Take many problem with you many of you have it recognize making our building unproductive that speak AI. It's about using knowledge graphs and linked data to standardize the way information is represented across entire construction lifecycle.

It's about establishing a robust data backbound for our industry so that all the powerful AI tools we develop can plug into the same reeds reliable information flow.

Building on that data-centric foundation. The second talk zooms into a design process itself. It introduces an AI solution andered in PI tools, which provides real-time.

explaining about kindness on building costs and design standards. This technology illustrates how AI can act as knowledge partner. He been architects and engineers make better decisions from the start and drastically reducing the risk of costly rebirth or permitting delays.

After focusing on how AI can be woven in the detailed design task, we will expand our scope to a broader societal challenge. Our third presentation is a state of the art of using AI together with Heritage Beam for sustainable rehabitation. It's a powerful example of AI technology applied to complexrebi AIC system in this case, breaching the gap between digital data and strategic decision making for a built heritage.

Finally

we will dive into the nuts and bolts of AI meteorologies themselves through a comparative study of two different AI approaches.

for understanding design information. The 4th presentation deals with two deep construction drawings, which is still the primary way how

uh.

just check the time.

which is still the primary way projects are permitted to globally. This gives us a glimpse of the future. ASE workforce where multiple AI techniques can be used.

So if we step back and look at the big bits of season 4. You'll notice a common theme enabling the flow of information through intelligent systems and each presentation shows a different facet of this.

So, and actually our first presentation, which is how knowledgeable crafts allows AAC product data to speak AI they have told me Arola and the roarviden here Oalhaba wasn't able to join this time and Tom Tommy is a research director for the digital ability environment at the building Information Foundation, his main interest include automating manual information exchange between construction and maintenance and developing AI data processing.

And Tera works works as a development director and construction and property development services department in Ground. Teo has 30 years of experience in mechanical related tasks using beam models. So actually told me you were together with Otto and Oskar Dora, who will be on the floor. Tomorrow they actually won

the best presentation award last year's, so no pressure. No, nobody hasn't done it twice. It has been given only once.

And thoughts of what will be also from this year's present, uh, this year's uh conference in which way we will do it, but anyway, congratulations for you, for your achievement. So you got the free ticket here.

But actually this presentation you so please welcome.

Thank you. Uh

Can you hear? OK. OK.

Uh, have a nice afternoon. Uh, dear AEC AI group here and, and, and we are very happy to introduce some of our ideas how knowledge crafts aligns AEC product data to speak AI. My name is Tom Merolastero said, and my name is Teo Arvian, so that's the easy part for me. Yeah, so unfortunately, like Isa said, Otto will not be here, so I will take charge on this, this first step, uh, what we

like to introduce you, uh, yeah, last year, we emphasized emphasized what kind of AI agent system there is ongoing under underdevelopment and, and, and what I want to show here, we are now digging into details now a bit more, uh, related to how the product data can be uh attached within the beam models and, and, and so with, with, with using knowledge craft and and that kind of stuff. But first of all,

uh, we need to discuss

how beam can be uh joined into bill of materials. That's one crucial part where we need to take focus on to make this this product data flow happen.

Uh, first there's 11 air duct, uh, in Finland, what we have developed is, is a nomenclature can you say the the right word, national Finnish standardization for IFCA mechanical design yeah, meaning that the nomenclature part there is that we can identify in general level

each individual objects in the model.

which means that, that, that with using this information attached to a product data catalogs, but product catalogs, we can, uh, enrich the data with GT number and and specify the data and and the object itself to be more what we choose for. So we are want to enter from uh engineering bill of materials when we design something in your bill of materials for manufacturing, which helps us to make

the, the product level information.

that flows through the, the whole construction value chain.

Uh, this can be automatically done. That was previously told last year and, and, and now we're going stepping into the system level. What we, what we are focusing on, it's all about

to merge the design phase into procurement stage, procurement phase at this time, which means that when we have the nomenclature in place, uh, wait a sec here. Uh, when do we define the general product uh codings for for models, uh, we need to, uh, join that for

wait a sec for the structured beam models because without having the identification of of product information in a beam model. The system is broken.

That's something what we want to fix here. And, and when we go further on, uh, when we have the nomenclature

uh objects in place in the models, then we can export the IFC for procurement phase.

which means that we can define the engineering bill of materials

uh, we can define the

uh, using the product data registry has shown us, uh, the manufacturing bill of materials, and this allows us to digitalize the whole procurement value chain, uh, using Peppo. There's now ongoing development in the Nordics, according to Beppo, how we adopt the PEPPO in the procurement part of the construction.

And, and that there is no forum being established and the work is going on, how we can from bill of materials turn these into messing systems using Peppo to procure an order things.

What this is all about? What is this all about? It is all about linking the data.

We need to on top of that system, what what I showed you. We need to have a linkages between different data sources. In Finland, we do have a national interoperability platform for these codings, uh, which means that we need to link that to the information standards.

We have an information flow from the production in a construction companies that needs to be linked.

We need to link the supply chain

to cover the, the log logistics and all the procurement and order processes to make happen that we can order the, the, the concretic and and real products.

Uh, that's also linked to the information flow for the financial information. That's one critical part of what we are usually missing. That's something that in each company who involves who have been involved in the construction value chain. Also the financial information is very crucial because of the CSRD reporting and that kind of stuff where the um, whether a financial departments are very interested in. So these linkages should be

in place and

that's, that's one

core part of the, the, the whole flow. Do you have something to add? No, not this time. Yeah. So we're discussing here these linkages. I will show you some couple of examples how this happens in my last slides, but, uh, there's ongoing research now going on in Finland. How we define the quality criteria for beam models, and that's one part of the foundation where, where we define the good foundation for AI models. We need to be aware

how the geometry happens, how the geometry is in the bin models to make this this machine readability happen together with these linkages.

Uh, we need to define the information content, what is the uh deviation of different information parameters within the models. These all parameters are things that need to be where we need to be aware to make the beam models as good as possible.

uh, and, and also to make good um analysis of, of and, and, and, uh, enrichment of of bill of materials that's also some something but, but the core thing here is that that we need to define this, we need to be aware of this, these criteria in overall to make this AI foundation happen. And now what is important here, we are going to showcase you a couple of examples of how this can be

done in the in the real real world and cases and now Teo stage is yours. Thank you.

Now I know how awkward this is stand behind somebody talking all the time. You have seen the Trump or somebody, lots of people behind them. Nobody talks anything. Now it's my turn. So I'm talking a little bit about uh how we are using IFC files and how we combined that to the air hand unit information. So what Tommy show was made with the standardized as IFC models, and that's more important thing to have such kind of understandable seman

tic information in input when we are moving towards AI. So this is what uh one use case a couple of ideas, what I would like to show how to handle better information that we have categorized the information and it's not like LLM, it's like a optimized standardized, understandable semantic information which we can tell to AI that this is the information that you are using. And wanting in a morning,

their sessions they were also scalability word going on. So we need to go if we want to make business with the AI or these kind of tools we need to have scalability and business understanding what we are doing, so we can do lots of things, you know, pilots or one project, but I want to make a 100,000 project or something like that with these tools. It has to have scalability.

uh

for my opinion, I not only my opinion, we need some kind of ontology, but we do not have right now a whole building life cycle. This is a nice picture of it made by Seppoderma products sitting there, uh, and that there is lots of ontologies which contains information in different phases of the construction project, but uh we need to

have links to different kind of ontologies also. I do not believe at least now, maybe next year, I believe that we could have one on let's say if it solves everything. I think we need multiple anthologies.

And then, uh, because I'm a mechanical designer. I want to show that we could have more information in IFC. We have quite a lot talking about products and components like a damper floor dampers, and venti ventilation and so on. So just want to remind that there is an IFC port possibility inside of the IFC specification that we can follow the route from the reuser.

If I click something in the ceiling, it goes straight to the air hunting unit, and I have every component in the root. So this is like a starting point how to build graphic databases, one slide coming for that.

And of course I want to have as LDFs, I want to put IFC to the graph database. There is a tool for that also made by Yurki Oraskari, IFC to LPD converter. So there are tools to do really nice things don't exactly know why we are not using it.

Uh, tend the understanding, uh, why we need graph databases. So this is the initial information what we can offer for when we are making designing like just a clicking the right buttons in our software. So we have IFC model which has IFC ports. Every component knows the route to the A&D unit. Then we have A10 unit technical specification in some database or somewhere we can link this together. So that's how I can start to analyze the network.

and the use cases is next light after that. So when I put that information to the graph database, this is as an example, not a real situation just because I couldn't manage to do it with the IFC supports right now, but maybe tomorrow.

The ideology that we have the craft database, I can click something. I can follow things. I can add more information, really useful when we are embedding IFC information to such kind of system.

Then the one use case, of course, there is lots of different use cases. Uh, I was developing digital dreams about 1010, 1015 years ago and uh we were looking too much like a graphical interfaces all the time. I click something and I can see information and information maybe comes from multiple sources or something, so what I want to make analysis. So with this kind of methods, uh, if I have bad air here, I can click tip.

diffuser, have a route, of course I have linked my IFC or graph database to building automation system I can see measurements. I can analyze what's the problem, why there is said to too much CO2 levels or something like that.

And the last sentence here, when we use ontologies standardized data, we are able to produce scalable analysis environments. Just put the files to the correct place and you are ready to go. That's the ideology of what we are like trying to figure out how to do it in the data platforms we need to get rid of IFC files and a file-based systems we need to be inside of that data platforms and then TET model, what Tombe said, Tommy so

that we'll start to work and then but I, I to that kind of system.

Thank you

Last part, uh, I would like to introduce also um the one idea what is actually pretty new in Finland. uh, how to make

model context protocol in in in this game because, because the AI agent is evolving. We know that, but, uh, we need this linked data. We need the structured data to be told for the AI models. And

as, as generally told, it's a USB stick for AI. We can outsource different tasks for AI using using the model context protocol, but in Finland we have defined the interoperability.

definitions, uh, what is part of this culture what I presented, uh, and, and, and that's something that's, that's pretty new for for MCPs now, uh, in Finland we have defined, uh, three different, um, domains, reference data, logical data models, and terminological work vocabularies for building environments, and what is important here is, is that there is now pretty, pretty new, uh, MCP. It's actually we will provide this

thing to you. Uh, it's uh defined in in the GitHub. Uh, we have defined the MCP server which can read all these interoperability guidelines.

So terminology reference data, and, and, and, and logical data models, how the data is structured and what is this is just a case, uh, we have used this, this model context protocol solution for for reading the the MIP MEP, uh, nomenclature and, and, and

joined that for the for the real product information I used Basta, a service from from Sweden product data sheet just a case example, but it's very nicely, uh, I used anthropic AI model to put these two together. I asked AI model to, to, uh, merge the product information in the nomenclatures, the Finnish code set and it immediately the the MCP server can read the logical data

model and and then join that for the product information where we can identify the product product with a with a specified um uh nomenclature, which means that that whenever uh we define a new nomenclature or we define more, uh, code sets for, for

beam models. We can learn that for the MCP server, which means that it's fully scalable. We can do actually we can give for the AI model the, the concrete, uh, definitions of data, which means that there is no hallucination at all anymore. So, so we can, uh, actually I can't say anymore or totally no hallucination, but uh, but uh it it can be more bulletproof than on the logical

LLMs or that kind of an AI model. So, uh, my experience now with a very few trials is that MCP server works very well, very well for the construction domain to, to make specified tasks and, and, and, and, and make a learning process for for AI model to, to enrich the data. And that's one part of the linked data. What, what makes the craft-based data to be more efficient than than previouss. So

so this is an ongoing development and research now in Finland, uh, and, and I see that that this is a kind of a one big solution to, to, uh, um, to improve the, the construction value chain and the data processes.

and I want to, uh, pinpoint one discussion point by the end of this presentation that we need to define the architecture. Enterprise architectures have not been quite in a in a popular in a previous times, but this is something when we develop the agent AI in the whole AEC community and also within one organization we need to define the enterprise architecture to get the return on investment, but was raised in the keynote speaker.

uh, and, and that's something that we need to, to be aware that we know the data, what is in place. We need the data. We know the data processes what's what's in the community and and within one organization, and this is, these are the parts where we can also make the uh agent Dick AI happened in an organization level and in a community.

That's all. Thank you

Thank you. Any questions from the audience?

Any hands up?

Not even professor.

There's

uh, thank you. Can, can you explain a little bit how, how you use Knowledge graph with uh MCP.

A knowledge graph with a MCP, uh, in our finished, uh, interoperability platform. There is a raft model behind the how the how the uh different attributes of the data is defined, so there is a, there is a knowledge craft behind that. So the MCP server calls an API that calls for the for the craft.

OK, question for Teo, uh, he will talk about, uh, digital twin 10 years ago. How it differs from the digital twin in the future.

after we have done work with the T model and everything what you talk about, yeah, from my opinion, what's the definition of digital twin differs from people who you ask, but the definition definition 10 years ago is for my opinion, very good. It has to have some kind of analysis and so on. There is somebody says that point Cloud is digital print it's rubbish. So, so we need to have analysis simulations. We need to know how building is behaving.

tomorrow after a week and so on. So for me, that kind of thing is something like digital field, but it's just a abstraction of reality, what kind of level it is depends on the business case as you can see, there is this that within environments you know building owners, but they are not in real use for my opinion.

Yes, exactly. Are they going to be in the future I hope when we have scalable uh creating of the digital twin and updating that that's the most problematic part because we cannot update even drawings in the buildings. So how we update building information models and how we update the information that we make changes, really big process change in facility management. exactly. Thank you. Thank you. Good questions.

Thank you guys. Thank you.

So next presentation explainable AI for real-time building compliance and design standards in BEAM. So we have Boris Levin and Tom Pattito, co-founders of, uh, uh, Arun.

So you are this Hello everyone. Thank you for joining. Unfortunately, uh, boys couldn't make it, so I will have to entertain you.

Um, so today we will talk about how we use AI to turn late stage compliance to real-time design intelligence, a guidance inside BIM.

As you all know, regularity is national codes are expanding and tightening climate requirements are becoming more demanding and detailed, and liability is shifting towards designers and complexity is just increasing.

but yet we still treat regulation as something we check after design decisions are made, static external checks.

and this mismatch is becoming unbearable. In every building project, compliance sits as the barrier between architectural intentions, obtain and obtainable permitting, but the problem is timing and bandwidth.

We design first and we check compliance only after. It's like printing a chapter or a book and checking for typos after you print.

This is the root cause of most delays, review cycles and permitting blockers.

So compliance today, unfortunately relies on multiple costly consultants, each one reviewing a fragment of the regulations and not all of them in different times.

There isn't one consultant that knows all the regulations at once.

Um, and ultimately, the architects are expected to make sure that intent compliance execution, and timing align, and this becomes, they become the mediators of the entire process, translating clients' ambitions into buildable design, aligning with regulations, coordinating multiple consultants.

and still upholding their own design vision and office standards.

So the whole process today is human dependent, fragile architects designed first, consultants review later. Authorities respond last.

So of course, uh

this process creates long feedback loops, weeks of interpretation, multiple redesign cycles, permit rejections and delays, and a lot of costs for the industry.

Just an example, one residential project after almost a year of planning, the team discovered only a single definition in a distinct master plan, the technical roof counted as a full floor.

4 apartments disappeared overnight. Mills in clients' revenue were gone, and it wasn't a design mistake. It was just a mis-sentence in a PDF, but these mistakes were invisible during the design process.

but compliance already changed elsewhere. For example, in banking, AI-driven fintech monitors transactions continuously in flags suspicious behavior in real time as well in the health industry and legal tech, but architecture um stayed behind and this industries in banking and legal rules are complex, are non-negotiable, um, but it shifted from post review to real-time guidance.

So still, architecture, although the stakes are high, the rules are dense, and mistakes are costly, we're still anchored to lead stage reviews and manual feedback.

Why LLMs don't solve it alone.

Architecture is special. It requires measuring life geometry, understanding relationships between elements, understanding floor to floor conditions, providing cetacean and traceability, and much more. They are extraordinary attack

but compliance is not a Q&A exercise.

Geometry matters. This is not a language problem. It's a geometry and context problem. Buildings are special systems and regulations are conditional, spatial logic. LLMs alone hallucinate and work on predictability, but answers must be deterministic, parametric, explainable, and geometry aware.

So we know that compliance checks should be based on geometry in context, not as a checklist, but as a continuous reasoning layer. Always present, always aware of geometry, always aligned with the regulation.

So the real question is how do we embed regulation in the design environment itself inside the workflow.

The answer is an AI native compliance engine embedded directly inside beam tools working constantly in the background on live ongoing developed models.

It's like having one consultant

who knows each and every regulation, has seen thousands of models and and edge cases and continuously monitoring the BIM model in real time.

When it, when a design decision creates a potential issue, this engine flags the flags it in the model within a few seconds. Explain why it matters with broad cross model context, cites the relevant regulation with RRref and guides you through actionable planning alternatives. The architect remains in control, responsibility stays human. AI only provides continuous visible reasoning.

To make that possible, we had to build a compounded compliance intelligence tack orchestrated by a multi-agent workflow that understands geometry, context, and building codes simultaneously. Multiple layers working together depending on one another.

At the foundation, we formalized human regulations, converted to computable logic and rules.

Then we move to beam interpretation, interprets complex, messy, ever changing beam models.

and then on top of that hybrid reasoning engine that combines rules, geometry and context to evaluate this unconditions, and at the end, of course, real-time validation continuously inside BIM.

Perhaps the bigger gains won't come from doing the same thing come from doing the same tasks faster, but from deleting entire legacy steps bridging between design actions and reviews. AI is enabling a system that is acting as a catalyst for everyone involved in the project, the developers, consultants, architects, and the authorities.

To unlock this potential, we had to address 3 core challenges. First, regulations are not machine ridable by default. Building codes were never written for machines. They were written by humans for humans. So turning regularity texts and sketches into something a system can reason on requires interpretation, spatial obstruction, engineering judgment, and symbolic logic.

not just training a model, but an accurate, inaccurate regularity reasoning layer.

Secondly, B models are not clean and standardized datasets.

Beam models are inconsistent. They're messy. They're not, they're firm specific. They're often incomplete, and they reflect design intention more than technical correctness, understanding a B model means knowing what a corridor or an exit is usable space or structure when a room tag is missing or what is an annotation or an actual element.

Most generic AI tools can see shapes, but to reason an architecture they must understand geometry, typology, hierarchy, use and constraint, and all of these interconnected or often conflicting.

And lastly, trust and responsibility are non-negotiable. In architecture. Compliance decisions must be explainable, traceable, and defensible. Black box outputs simply cannot cross that boundary, an AI system guiding compliance decisions must defend its reasoning by pinpointing the issue.

highlighted on the model and citing the regulation in an accurate way.

When did the system that connects AI to regulations, beam data, and human responsibility in real time. Once regularity, ambiguity, messy beam data, and rust are just together with AI, leveraging those capabilities, the right way becomes possible.

So looking back for decades, drawings were just lines on paper. Beam change something fundamental. Models became organized, measurable, and data rich. Walls have structures, doors have properties. Rooms have areas and quantities, buildings became computable.

but compliance, it didn't evolve with it. We still export 2D drawings with still check PDFs and we still review them manually or externally to the design process itself.

So A alone doesn't easily solve compliance. Neither does beam alone self-compliance, but by tapping directly inside the beam model using it as live context for eugenic workflows, the process becomes an ongoing conversation between design intent

logic

and human decision making

This combination enabled 4 things.

real-time feedback, issues surface during design, not externally or in static snapshots, accuracy grounded in context. Rules are evaluated against actual geometry, intent, contradicting actions on conflicting issues, scalability across jurisdictions. Rules can be updated, expanded, or swapped.

based on the location

Holistic compliance logic. Cross-reference requirements for multiple disciplines are evaluated together.

not frozen snapshots or static noncontextual documents.

So now we can streamline all regularity disciplines that are inherently data driven.

in a beam model. These are fields where compliance is grounded in measurable conditions, areas with, heights, and distances between elements. These allow checks as occupant load calculations, egress and corridor widths required numbers of sanitive fixtures and much, much more, and most importantly, reasoning across all of them simultaneously continuously in the background in the context, while architects just keep working as they did before.

Disability is designed to support compliance across the full architectural planning lifecycle. From early zoning and masting through schematic design permitting and into later bidding and coordination stages, so regularity intelligence travels through the stages where most decisions are made.

This is not theoretical.

Early singles show impact and these results show that what used to take months with costly back and forth if we use AI the right way, connecting it to the right data, um, results can be significant.

Looking forward, this approach scales far beyond a single plugin. The regulation becomes structured and executable in real time. Compliance can become a shared visible process, not fragmented or lost, eliminating rework loops and accountability gaps. It allows everyone to afford compliance architecture at scale, moving it from a review output to a design input.

We believe AI should amplify human agency, not automated. The real opportunity isn't replacement but reallocation, freeing up time for better thinking, stronger judgment, and better design design decisions. The shift is significant, but it's not about removing the human judgment. It's about supporting better judgment.

earlier.

Thank you

Thank you, Tom

So before, before we ask from our audience. So one question I just a few weeks ago, I saw the video from some business meeting in USA and this guy, perhaps you know Bezos, a proma Amazon said, Why does it take months and months and months to get a building permit. It doesn't make any sense. Miami should have an AI application that reads your building permit for a new house or a new building, and it should give you yes or no in

10 seconds. If the answer is no, it should tell you the six things you have to change to get to yes. How does that sound?

How what? How does it sound to you? How does that sound to me? It sounds like a promising future. I think if you if you need funding, he might, might have some extra money. You don't even notice I wish she was sitting here. That was the presentation. Yeah, you should call him. Any, any questions from our audience?

Hi Tom. Hello. I was wondering how many languages and how many countries are supported by your two. Yes, so the foundation of this is a jurisdiction agnostic and bi agnostic. So the, the obstruction layer, the, the specifically this is built in a way that it would allow it at scale, as I said, which means that if you want to work in Barcelona, but in a week later you want to build in New York, you can do that expanding it is technically is a matter of days.

maybe a week

Thanks.

Any other questions?

So what are, what our next

development state in your sense, in your uh products. Uh, well, of course, the, the construction and buildings and architecture have much more categories to comply with rather than just the ones I presented sanitary accessibility, fire safety, these are all, um, as I said, a special uh with distances, but you need to be compliant with many, many other things ranging from electricity to plumbing and so on. So

we envision an engine like that that can be fed with any requirement, whether it's sketch or written, and be the output should be real-time guidance.

So have you, have you noticed if you think about the users who are maybe not so well with for example architects. So how easy it has been used to use for them. So I think someone mentioned that in the other room someone asked, So what, what's the best way to use AI. So there's many best ways, but it's, we, I think by not disturbing or changing the current ways architects work. Um, they don't like that so much and and and and b, it's

um it's, it's, it's more effective that there is something added in the background without changing anything. You don't need to learn anything new, and it's just accelerating your work and you suddenly feel the change. You speak to those consultants, you submit permit faster.

So.

OK, thank you. Any other questions?

If not, then, thank you, Tom. Thank you very much.

So, next, next presentation. We are, we are, we are taking a little bit more challenge, challenging, challenging.

solution on how to utilize AI. So Eyan Sarifan is PhD candidate at the National School of Architecture Landscape of Lille and member of Architecture Design Territory and History Research Laboratory at the University of Lille. So welcome on the stage.

Oh, good afternoon, everyone. I'm Elan Sha Efan, and today I'm presenting AN HM integration for the sustainable and predictive rehabilitation of 20th century serial social housing heritage, a state of art review as a part of my PhD project, which is conducting at the University of Lille in Lech Laboratory.

Uh, so, uh, I think first we should uh start with the um uh significant importance of the social housing in the Europe 20th century serial uh social housing is one of the largest and most vulnerable segments of the European built environment. Rehabilitation is the preferred strategy due to the growing environment and social imperatives, but these structures are failing across four dimensions.

material aging, uh, climate sensitivity, energy inefficiency and fragmented documentation.

I think uh first, uh, after this one, we should say that uh this social housing, um, are very important due to their scale, uh historical significanceificance significance and uh current urgency which are uh these social housing or industrialized and and standardized um when they uh when they were built after World War II.

So there are the symbols of modernity and social progress. Uh, but their rehabilitation of this social housing is not the same as the traditional one. We have uh in our heritage buildings.

because uh there are some differences, uh, for example, they have dwellings in it and uh there are some uh different in material um between them and the uh ancient one, traditional ones.

and also demolition is not a good idea because it's not sustainable, and we try to rehabilitate, rehabilitate them.

uh, but this rehabilitation has uh some um uh gaps in the process. So we try to have a a stock scale, a decision making process that uh uh AI would help, uh, fulfilling it.

So here as you can see, uh, the technical uh technological promise remains unfulfilled by fragmentation.

Uh, we have, um, traditionally we have H beam, uh uh heritage building information modeling and the one side and the artificial intelligence at the other side, which both are um well-defined uh through researchers, but their combination and integration for the social housing heritage is missed.

The core inside is, despite significant advances current digital tools for social housing, rehabilitation remains weakly integrated.

So uh based on what we what I explained that there are 4 modular questions uh through the uh articles and the studies we had till now, which are how our AI and HEA currently combined in the literature to support building rehabilitation, to what extent do these approaches address sustainability, prediction and decision support how frequently are 20th century serial social housing

conceded and what limitation gaps and methodological bottlenecks emerge from the analysis.

Um, a methodology that was uh conducted at the research was a systematic and transparent review protocol, uh, which was used to review the studies we had on the science and science uh between 2014 and 2025.

and based on the um based on the uh methodology um under the uh PRISMA guidelines and created a criteria we had based on the title, uh, at last 41, um studies were deeply analyzed

and they were defining to 4 segments energy rehabilitation, edge beam, artificial intelligence and uh socio-technical dynamics.

Uh, so, after reviewing all uh reviewing all the studies and analyzing them. There were 4 key findings, uh, which will, uh, be, uh, explained in the few uh next slides.

even pipeline maturity limited predictive capacity, the serial housing blind spot and omission of human factors.

Finding one is uh about the digital pipelines. Uh, actually, as I told you, there are lots of studies, mature and automated uh studies in uh HBam. For example, um, scan to beam and uh semantic uh semantic segmentation.

which I, for example, machine learning significantly reduces modeling time and improves consistency and uh documentation.

um

but um

sorry

but this, uh, when it comes to the AI

there are um fragmented and disconnected. Energy optimization and predictive modeling, which are used by AI to be used in HP are fragmented and disconnected. AI-based predictive models are often developed outside of HP environments. They rely on simplified archetypes instead of integrated building data and severally limiting their operational use.

So, and the next finding would be the predictive capacity and decision of limited, as I told you uh at first, and this social housing uh needs uh a stack scale decision support systems for their rehabilitation process.

But while many studies claim decision support objectives, explanation remained focused on isole short term performance metrics. Although we need a long-term end to an end, uh framework that link HPM environments with AI-driven multi-criteria evaluation and uncertainty management for long-term survival remains exceedingly rare.

So the other five findings which is really important is that uh this serial social housing, um, are at the blind spot of this study. As you can see here there are um many studies, um, for the monumental and monumental heritage and individual heritage buildings, but they uh is uh the study for housing stock is really rare because I uh we think that uh the importance of

this uh stocks are not really defined uh now.

And the last one is critical human factors are routinely omitted. Uh, as I told before,

um this uh rehabilitation of these stocks are are a whole building um rehabilitation, which should be sustainable.

For example, uh we have uh several programs in Europe, uh, that are working on this um

are working on the rehabilitation, for example, the program called NEB and new European Bahas, which calls our the heritage that are sustainable, inclusive, and beautiful. And for achieving these goals in this program like this one.

we need to uh consider the human factors, occupant behavior, the social issues we have there and the cultural value rehabilitation has direct social and political consequences. Curran HPMAI frameworks are fundamentally unoccupied to evaluate this dimensions.

So, uh, as a um

at landscape of gaps we can see here that at the bottom left, uh, we, there are the majority of studies are at the bottom left where we have a documentation on monumental and individual uh heritage and when it comes to the stocks and scale housing, and it comes to the prediction decision support system actually, uh, we can say we have nothing or uh the studies are very rare.

So, uh, the scientific problem space would say that this review contribution is not perspective, but strategic. We cannot achieve sustainable uh theoretical scale rehabilitation of 20th century social housing with a current tools. This review established a precise foundation justification required to build new integrated AI HI frameworks that can operate at both building and stock scale level.

So, um, we can uh

here we can uh have the conclusion of 3 key takeaways. First, uh, take it fragmented. AI and H beam are separate and they are not integrated into uh one place uh to fulfill the gaps.

The second line that focuses misaligned. Current research over optimizes short-term energy metrics. Uh, actually we need the long term ones, and at the urgent need, as I told you in Europe, there are several programs that uh needs sustainable rehabilitation. Do you think that AI can help uh this uh process.

and uh the next steps closing uh the integration gap um.

to be combined uh future research should focus on developing an integrated model for real cases that is worldwide. Uh, as a part of my PhD this was uh the um state of the art as a part of my PhD project, which will continue to work on the real case studies in France, uh specifically in Lille and the other cities we have in France in um actually we can say the case study is called uh O

N C models or model innovation.

uh which uh will be uh interact with take place in the project and we will try the tools and the uh integrated framework on them, and after that this um

integrated framework can be conducted to other uh case studies all around the Europe.

They integrated framework will finally link HMM knowledge environment with AI driven and prediction. Design explicitly for the uni.

and scale of 20th century social housing.

Thank you very much for your attention.

Thank you

Any questions

So

um

how do you get the people who live in the buildings to share information with you, because you said one of the weaker points is the, the people actually living there and the behavior that they have. So how do you make sure that you get that information in, uh, in the model or in the learning curve, I should, um, explain that in France there are some um stakeholders that owns the buildings, um, the social housing has the uh some institute.

uh that owns them, uh, which we meet, uh, we have meeting with them and and uh with that their health we can collect the data from the dwellers and uh maybe this will happen, uh, this data will be collected by the use of AI in uh maybe some apps or the um uh things like this, this that can collect data from the dwellers. So, uh, this is the one part that AI may help.

What about when you are going to the next phase, if you think about how fast AI is developing, so, uh, in the sense of time scale because PS studies

take some time, so it's like some article based so that you can publish something when you go further or how do you do it to have the results before the tools develop further so that you have to reanalyze. I think um actually your uh your true, but, uh, in our project because we are um always um in um relation with the um stakeholders, stakeholders, and the duallers. I think uh this would help us to be

updated to the new tools as I told, uh, as I mentioned in the uh in the slides, there are several steps that needs to be done, and in each steps we are not um

um

be up to, uh, these are studies that have been done and it's always getting updated, so I, I think we can handle it with this uh solution.

Great. Any other questions?

So if, uh

and you triggered a new question.

Uh, we have quite a few of these buildings in the Netherlands.

and they're, I think 14 to typologies, I think you call it. Is there, do you know if is there a program in the Netherlands that is doing this investigation or this study? No, I don't know, actually the ne I mentioned is a European uh program. There are other, uh, Euro European program, but I'm, I don't know if, uh, it's, um, one specifically for Netherlands or not, but they are were some studies that were conducted at the uh slides uh that uh

worked under the rehabilitation of the social housing in Netherlands, but um not um integrating some uh tools like HBM and AI because I can imagine that uh uh social housing projects from the 1950s in the Netherlands is typically different than one in, for example, France. They look different. They feel different. They are actually different. So my question is, can you, can you say something about the situation in the Netherlands on the basis of the

investigation that you're doing now. Yes, I think the outcome of this research is that an integrated framework which will uh um be suited to each uh case study we we have uh by putting um different data from for example, uh heritage value, their architectural design, and the dwellers, uh they they gave us. You can put all the different datas in it and um it's

became a useful, useful for uh each country.

Yes

Great, thank you. So

good luck with your PSA studies. It's a kind of brain marathon. I can say it from my experience, so all the, all the good for you. So let's give a clap

you.

OK, last but not least, we are a little bit ahead of time, but that's a fault of the timekeeper. So, but let's take the last presentation anyway, so let's now deep dive to 2D. Christopher Mulhart is the founder and CEO of Marked Up AI you apply a blend of strategic system thinking global business experience and the talent for invitation and discernment. I think this would be very, this is very interesting because there are a lot of

s te stuff in 2D, so we are only talking beam all the time, so nice to deep dive in 2D. Thank you, appreciate it. Hello everybody and Dr. Safrada is excellent, and she's also hails from my family's hometown in the north of France. Despite my funny accent. I'm Christopher Mouflat. I've been in the bim thing since about 2008, and over the last couple of years, last 3 years, I've been investigating convolutional neural networks and all sorts of things to apply in a more practical way, not to say that

it's the death of BIM, but the reality is that construction happens in a 2D drawing. We'll talk a little bit about that. Um, I'm here on behalf of my colleagues Hammad and I Khan. They can't be here today. Uh, but we're going to talk a bit about, I tried to find the most boring

title, agentic versus convolutional neural networks comparison for object detection in 2D geometry. And the reason why I bring this up is that at the end of the day architects, engineers, etc. have to deal with people like me who were carpenters and were just wanting to know where we've got to put the stuff, exactly where you intended it, and the result of that is the 2D drawing. That's the thing that happens. Uh, so I wanted to put up an example here. This is a door schedule and

this door schedule

this is what you would expect to see. And so we'll talk about why that's important.

But the real title that I thought would be more interesting would be why you can't yet just use Cloud code to successfully read construction drawings, and that's really what we're going to talk about and investigate today. And on the other side here is another diagram. This is another blueprint or architectural drawing, construction drawing, and oh, if you guys could send me the photos. My wife will be super proud.

So yeah, please. Uh, so this is another example, and again this is a document with teeny tiny tags everywhere, and that's the kind of stuff that we're dealing with, and believe me, I just tried Claude code for a couple of hours last week and even Opus 4.6, the latest, can't do it. So

I'm not trying to be in a pessimist because I am actually super optimistic about this. So what's going on? And I'll try to ask five whys in my lean education on what's going on, so what's going on in the 2D drawings.

The tagline is according to the smart people at Autodesk, $65 billion a year in rework last year or in that year just because the construction drawings are not coordinated. They're missing information.

Why? Second, why?

Owner ask people to build things. The architect goes and designed it. They hand it over to engineers. They have to check it to make sure that is beyond the physical representation. This is going through documents and checking and seeing it. The architect is then approved to send it to the GC to build. They checked the drawings. They send it to the sub trades. They check the drawings, and this whole thing starts all over again when the project actually gets greenlit. There's a lot of points in the program

that brains have to be checked, and that is for things like compliance, and that's for things like spelling errors and little things like that.

Third, why, why does this even matter?

Because I don't know if you guys have sat down with a complex door schedule that's spread across 75 pages, but semantically checking that the tags are actually in the schedule is freaking boring. It's very boring work, but it's extremely important because you need to know how many doors are in there. You need to understand the details that are in there. And the reality is that the good folks over at a company called ReyCheck, which is a US-based company that wrote a book about it. It's 270 pages on how to read construction drawings, and they highlighted drawings in

three broad categories. I promise this is going somewhere and it's not a demo, but I got the demo memo late, but there are surface level issues. These are truly just like is it there or not there? This is slightly inference related, so this is what I call what they call subsurface and then root level issues as well. These are true constructability things. This is the promise of BIM, structural wall, mechanical duct, can't put that there.

The reality is, is Harry.

look at that beautiful kid. He's my younger brother, actually he's my wife's younger brother, but I love him as if he was my brother, and Harry was doing his university degree and got the chance to intern at a construction company, and they gave him too much scope for his skills, and he made $100,000 error.

He ordered more windows than there were openings.

Why? Because he trusted that the schedule would be correct, so he didn't know to count. The window openings, he just trusted that the architect would have updated the schedule and everything would have gone perfectly, and 43 windows would have showed up or 53 windows, but there was 40 anyways, you kind of get the drift. This is a problem. This is why we need technologies like this because, yes, we need to teach people how to read construction drawings. He went to my university and they still don't teach programs on how to read 2D drawings. Crazy. I don't know if you have that problem here in Finland though. I don't imagine.

So what am I going to talk about really, really important but kind of boring stuff. Convolutional neural networks broadly known as computer vision. These systems are really, really cheap, efficient, and accurate, but they suck at kind of learning on the fly. Meaning that you can train them to look for certain things. So in this experiment in this paper, what we've done is we've taken a you only look once. This is a type of CV model. We trained it on some

very boring construction data that took about 3 weeks to annotate. That means drawing little bounding boxes on a screen and feeding it in through a pipeline. And then we asked it to go find that on new data, right? So that's what we did.

It's really cheap, like less than a penny to look for this type of stuff, and the inference time was faster, or about 30 seconds, and we'll talk about that. So drawing CV, computer vision or convolutional neural networks, CNN to post processing.

But of course there are also the vision language models. So what we did, because I am perpetually paranoid that AI is going to take my job.

And so what we did is we took then

and this is about

November, December. So this is Gemini 3.0, etc. Cloud 4, we built a similar pipeline. We looked at the whole page. We broke the page into 5x5, into 3 by 3. Don't worry, I'm going to add some actual images of like what the output was on this, so you'll be able to see this. And we try to improve that, but we are always struggling against the context window, which is how many tokens you're about to spend relative to the amount of information that it could suck up and then push back out. So there are some specific limitations

not excluding the cost, but also the amount of time that it took per class of object that we asked it to go find. And so again, drawing some amount of organization through a prompt and then VLM, and this task took us about 2 or 3 weeks to get right.

This is where it gets kind of spicy.

I like this because you can't just think about these things in isolation. I'll talk about this later. Is that in construction and architecture and engineering design intent is nice, but where it actually is, the accuracy of that thing is super important.

And so what we did is we decided to play them off of each other. We decided that, well, could we integrate a voting system between the VLMs and the CNNs and try to see what each would say and produce the most accurate results. And so

some things kind of happened here which we'll talk about, but there's a key metric which is the intersection over union. This is where you place where you think the thing is going to be.

and what we found was that the confidence levels will the total accuracy of this system improved dramatically when we actually added these things together. So this is a mixture of experts type of architecture stuff, but it balanced a couple of things that were useful. You have a more deterministic computer vision model, a more probabilistic VLM model, and they start to play well together.

Good

All right, kind of breaking down a little bit further so we time studied this.

the YOLO models took about 30 seconds per page, making them by far the most latent, um, the, the what was it really a surprise to me was the latency that we picked up in the hybrid model when we actually played these off each other.

and then the flip side of these was the cost. Now, I just don't think anybody's going to go out and like train their own YOLO model for the record, so they're probably not going to get those dramatic cost efficiencies or build one from scratch, whereas they might go to a VLM, but those context windows compound and I'll talk a little bit more about that in a second.

Meaning that they get more and more expensive, but we did see a nice cost reduction in the hybrid system.

These are the precision and recall. This is what we really care for in machine learning. PNR values. This is how well did it recognize what it saw.

How well did it recall what to think, what a thought, pardon, it saw.

Now again, CNN's way faster, far more latent, but again those hybrid systems really did see a dramatic push up into the total accuracy score and that recall value, which is extremely important.

The LLMs and VLMs for that matter, still really low on recall, and that's the critical measure. That's what, uh, if you can imagine how the brain works, like I recognize somebody's face, but do I remember their name?

And that's the really critical thing that we need the VLMs to be able to do and even testing the latest 4.6s, etc. that recall isn't just quite there yet, and that could be because 0.0001% of the internet is construction stuff, so I think that there's that. There's also a really good paper that was released, uh, not very long ago, but

it says, it talks about how multimodal large language models are shape blind, and I think that that's a really important thing for us to consider in the construction industry.

It might be very good at analyzing text. Pretty good at numbers, but we work in a world where everything is represented by some sort of a shape with data inside of it, and I think that that's a very important thing.

So here's the results. Uh, so again, remember these are sparsely trained and not trained at all types of systems. What you're looking at here, this is a construction drawing. If anybody was unfamiliar with it already, these little circles with the triangle hats, those are elevation markers. The ones where they are highlighted in a blue bounding box indicate what the model was able to find. This CNN model was about 84% accurate. I went through and added the red boxes which indicates what it didn't find.

The VLM is actually a little bit better for some reason in this case, but it was really freaking expensive.

So what costed me a penny costed me several dollars somewhere else. And so that's one page.

So if we're asking for this thing to look through thousands or hundreds or tens of pages.

you know, there's a cost consideration, but again, we started to see this, but the cost increased, and I'll talk about a little bit more. The best results were most certainly when we looked at a hybrid system when we try to again leverage both of them, but I'll talk about some of the downsides of that as well.

So this is kind of where I really wanted to take it a step back and talk a little bit more about the VLMs and maybe why when they operate within the context of a CNN they could produce a better result, but if they operate on their own, they were

quite overconfident in what they thought. So the first image, which is what we did in some of these examples, if you could imagine we took the sheet, broke it into 9 boxes, so 3 by 3 grid, and then we fed that grid and it's

back to the LLM or we took the whole document and fed it into the LLM with some assistance from the CNN. Um, what you'll see here is that anything highlighted in red is me highlighting where it actually is anything in blue is what the LLM thought. And so again, highly geometric shapes everywhere. This is a whole entire business is these technical drawings and the LM by itself, even when we blew up the context window was terrible.

So even when we didn't have more training and all the rest of it and try to voting system anyways, it just wasn't very good, but when we started to give it

just a little bit of input, that intersection over union, that IOU score resulted in a better result.

Um, so here's kind of what happened. Uh, I've got 4 minutes here. I'll try to carry on. But

the CNN's kind of again back to its sucks at learning on the fly. So even in the context of an imperfect shape, a rasterized tags, all these things have to be considered because construction drawings are not perfect, as it turns out, even from the same architecture firm, depending on the design team, you might have two entirely different types of PDF documents

In the VLM's cases, what we found was that a lot of the results were extremely ambiguous.

It missed small tags like you saw in the example, even when we blew up the context window, and mind you, OK, this was a generation old VLMs, but I don't see them getting much better.

Hallucinated in highly complex areas, um, but the one thing that I really want to talk about is that in the hybrid case, when the VLM was wrong, it and the CNN was right. The VLM would override the CNN. So this speaks to like overconfidence. It's just super, like it just was like you're yeah. So even then it would

push the bounty box and that was the example before.

My final why, I think this is at least my 4th or my 5th. Why does all this matter?

Because we're here at an engineering conference in AI. If AI technology isn't extremely accurate in the output that it's giving you, then, you know, that's can it be trusted? Is it usable in today's format beyond help me create a visualization or write an email. We need pinpoint accuracy that has to be king. Um, I fundamentally believe that we're in an age of staff augmentation. We're not in team replacement. I'm not sure yet.

PDF

Yes, I get it, BIM, etc. I love it, believe me, but that is still the way that nearly all projects are permitted, contracted, and then built.

All happens in the 2D drawing

That prompt control that I was talking about is extremely critical, so having very tight guardrails on how you want to manage that prompt.

That is really where that

managing the confidence level of the LOM is really critical. I really simple example here was I like to call it like LLM as OCR, but like it really sucked at understanding the difference between like a one, a lowercase l and uh and and yeah, a one in a lowercase l and uppercase I. Like what?

OCRs, which have been around forever, very good at that. So again, I think that we have to think about these in totality, and that's my final point is that these hybrid systems, these work great today to solve, to solve these problems for construction right now. Foreshore is there a point in the future where

Jan Lecoon's world model stuff takes over because that is truly looking at everything, probably, but for now we have immediate construction problems to solve. Uh, I was in 2008 where I thought 10 years from now everything will be in BIM.

This is nearly 20 years ago. I met with my old boss Ali Seinin the other day, just yesterday, and I was like, he's like, we should have made Vico for today. That's my, my heritage, and I, it probably would have worked. So anyways, uh, that's me.

You would like to send me a photo so I can send it to my wife. So he's great. Uh, otherwise, thank you very much. Appreciate it.

Thank you, Christopher. You really make this text live. So any comments?

Thank you, Christopher. It was really the presentation, very exciting, and your energy. I love that. Thank you. So, yeah, I'm data scientist, so they're not in construction at all. So my question is mainly about data science perspective. So in terms of like when you mentioned accuracy is king. I think there was a problem with accuracy. You might have heard of uh rate positive, and negative, um, sorry, the

to

positive rate and true negative or false positive. So it's kind of areas, so we cannot rely on accuracy at all. If your model keep

uh predicting negative is still the accuracy would be high. So it's not definitely it's not something that we could rely on that. And the second thing that I wondered why it's not mentioned in your presentation is about fine tuning because in neural networks models like CNN or VLM, hyperparameter is the key, not the parameter itself, so this is something that is defined by human.

So how would you like embed those like learning rates, number of batch, this sort of hyperparameter, then, you know, people are using these models, but they are not necessarily data science background.

Yeah, thank you. Yeah, of course, and hopefully I can answer part of this, um.

I don't expect a normal person, and what I mean by that is a project engineer like Harry, my younger brother, to care about batch sizes or workers or anything like that. From that's why technology innovators and people that are trying to build solutions are a critical part of this workflow. It goes back to, you can't just use cloud code to resolve this. You're going to get terrible results. You will, I promise. You can go for it. Try. I just, please show me the results and go for it and

I would love to be stumped

On our side, this was about a lot of experimentation, so we did some stuff that was pretty radical that even most people would think is slightly dangerous, so I was like, All right, I'm going to build my own computer.

And so we built the computer, put it in my kitchen, and then we just ran an experiment after experiment after experiment.

And that's what gave us the initial inputs to, all right, well how do we tune this right number of batch sizes. Where does memory cap out? How do you build these things so they're functional in an AWS server because it's all nice and well if you've got these huge ram sucking modules, but how is that actually practical to somebody in the field and so anyways, yes, that was just a lot of experimentation to try to figure out, well, what's the optimal for the result that we want so that we can build something that's actually meaningful to the end user who doesn't care.

They just want to press a button and get a result. That's the beauty of the echo chamber of the GPTs. You press a button, you get a result. You think it's right, you know, but we had to, in our case, and again there should have been a demo, but we wanted to produce the output that people could see visually or visual industry.

So to just make them happy.

Hopefully, yes. Any other questions there?

Hi, I would like to ask that if you give more context to the VLM. Will it, uh, affect the accuracy? Oh yeah, absolutely. Those things have to be so containerized and what you're, what you're giving to the prompt, I think it was a couple of 3 at the beginning of this session they just talked about that. I'm sorry, or maybe it was at the beginning of the morning, like if, if, if that, uh, Alex's presentation, he was the first person in this room. He noticed that when he gave it too broad of a prompt

that the outcome was terrible

And so even we are noticing that the inconsistency with the output on the same document with the same prompt can be too risky to use. And so this is, you know, a massive consideration in that and I think that we had a nice conversation over lunch, which is this might be good for my work.

but then how do I scale that to the next guy or the next person down the road. That that's where the risk comes in and and maybe that's why LLMs aren't always going to be the answer is kind of the whole point of this presentation. Thank you. You're welcome. Thank you.

Anything else? I have to say that if accuracy is keen, so in the sense of timekeeping, I'm no royal.

But I have a good news. Yeah, so, uh, if somebody didn't need all these are also these streams will be published later, so you will get notified about it. You can also arrange a date with your wife. What's your show, so if you missed part of this, some of these presentations, so you can watch them later.

Thank you, Christopher. Thank you, Vera

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "AI Technology and Systems" session at AI in AEC 2026 showcased transformative applications of artificial intelligence in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC), emphasizing scalability, sustainability, and intelligent workflows. Featuring speakers Boris Levin, Tom Batito, Christopher Mouflard, Aisan Sharifian, Tero Järvinen, Sonja Oksanen, Tommi Arola, and Otto Alhava, the session explored how AI-driven systems can address fragmented documentation, enhance decision-making, and streamline processes across diverse use cases.

Tommi Arola and Tero Järvinen opened with a discussion on knowledge graphs and Finnish nomenclature standardization, highlighting their role in enriching BIM models with product data. They introduced the scalable Model Context Protocol (MCP) server, which links structured data to AI systems, and emphasized the PEPPOL messaging system for automating procurement processes. Ontologies in construction and CSRD reporting were addressed as critical components for financial departments and sustainability goals.

Boris Levin and Tom Batito presented an AI-driven compliance engine embedded in BIM tools, offering real-time validation and guidance on building standards. This explainable AI solution reduces permitting delays and costly rework, showcasing the scalability of hybrid systems in compliance workflows.

Aisan Sharifian focused on integrating AI with Heritage BIM (HBIM) for sustainable rehabilitation of 20th-century social housing. She highlighted the New European Bauhaus (NEB) program and the importance of predictive frameworks that incorporate human factors, energy metrics, and cultural values. Semantic segmentation and digital twins were discussed as essential tools for long-term facility management and sustainability.

Christopher Mouflard concluded with a comparative study of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and vision-language models (VLMs) for object detection in 2D construction drawings. He demonstrated how hybrid systems, incorporating voting mechanisms and Intersection over Union (IOU) metrics, can improve accuracy and efficiency in analyzing complex architectural documents. The persistent reliance on 2D drawings in construction was emphasized as a critical challenge for AI integration.

The session underscored the transformative potential of AI in structuring, interpreting, and applying information across AEC workflows. By leveraging intelligent systems like the Anthropic AI model, scalable MCP server, and hybrid AI frameworks, the industry can achieve greater collaboration, efficiency, and sustainability in its processes.

Speakers

AS

Aisan Sharifian

-

Université de Lille

BL

Boris Levin

-

Arcyn AI

CM

Christopher Mouflard

-

MarkedUp

OA

Otto Alhava

-

Fira

TJ

Tero Järvinen

-

Granlund

TB

Tom Batito

-

Arcyn AI

SO

Sonja Oksanen

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

TA

Tommi Arola

-

Building information foundation RTS sr

================================================================================
SESSION 7: Session 5 KEYNOTE: From Curiosity to Capability: Upskilling Teams for AI Adoption in Construction
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

On the

Crossway

or the um the cross removal project in Australia.

Sorry for that. So whenever you find yourself in Australia in the future and you don't have to wait while crossing a railway, um, take a pause and think Bragan and the team. But of course he was not only working on that project, he's also bridging the gap between AA upskilling and engineering. I think that's something super, super important these days as well.

and

besides that

Dragon is a very lucky person these days because he's on a sabbatico. But uh don't think that he's not busy. It feels like that you're keeping yourself extremely busy because I just saw that you just launched a newsletter within the TechCO. Uh, you're supporting, um, yeah, guiding, advising, um, form work labs.

You're also joining us here today to be there for the keynotes, talking about AI trends.

and of course also we all have our personal hobbies and one of the personal hobbies or maybe passions, a sport and very specific sport. It's football.

but not the European version, also not the American version, but actually it's the Australian rules football version.

And um maybe many of you have followed last year around summer there was this humanoid.

robotics, Olympics in Beijing, and there were these adorable or fascinating videos of robots doing some 100 m sprints or boxing, um, I think you also all remember soccer.

So maybe that's something that we will see in the near future as well that in the next version, maybe next year or the year after, we will also see Australian rules football, uh, within the next Olympics version of this human rights.

But until then, I think, um, come along with me, uh, applause for Bragan. Come to the stage and thank you so much.

Thanks Simon

So time and time again, we've been seeing headlines like this pop up across popular media. It all goes back to how AI Future, uh AI future is already here. It's a both a reflection of the opportunity that's coming in terms of how our work is transforming through the use of AI and how our vision for the future of work is also changing. But what I found really interesting about this headline isn't what we see up here on the screen, but rather it's second

half, which is our AI future is already here, but it's just not evenly distributed. As we've heard over the course of today,

that the value of AI is being captured unevenly. A small proportion of firms are actually able to execute and implement AI effectively within these, their organizations. And one of the questions I've always had is why is that the case? And to just give you some numbers and understanding about it, I want to highlight to you what we're seeing on the ground, which is there's an adoption gap in terms of AI. So

referencing a report by Places Solutions on AI intelligence in construction. They surveyed over 400 people in our industry. And the answers were really surprising. On the ground, we're seeing adoption and use of AI, so 74% of people are saying, hey, we're using ChatGBT or a similar model daily or weekly. But when we go into the company level, when you ask them, hey, is your company actually ready to start using AI? Is

it ready to withstand the coming disruption? The answer that we're hearing is that 68% of people, 2/3 of people believe their companies aren't ready for the future.

And a a great question to ask is, you know, why is this the case? Why are we seeing AI being used, but in reality companies aren't ready. And I think one case, especially

relevant to our industry is it's seen as high potential but also high risk. And the reason why is we see headlines like this Time and time again in media. What it is, is a reflection that

over 1 in 10 people now are seen to accidentally copy and paste or upload information that they should not be uploading into Chat GBT. And when you look at our industry, AEC, what we noticed is that we work with confidential data. So whether that's project data, whether that's owner and client data, or whether that's IP that we have internally. So many companies are rightly concerned about increasing the adoption or increasing the exposure to these tools. And if we look at

the Dodge Construction Network's recent survey, they found that one of the biggest barriers to adoption is this concern of the security of company data because data leaked from people is something which is a caring and something we should be aware of. So how can we resolve this? My answer or my belief is that education is the way to go. What we can do is we can start to implement learning and training programs to improve the adoption of AI and continuing on from Dudge

Construction Networks survey, we're seeing this on the ground. So 40% of teams are starting to allocate AI budgets, and then 38% are now starting to create implementation teams. So teams on the ground that are focused on rolling out AI in a safe and secure way.

Now, in this presentation, what we're going to be going over is exactly how you can do this. So I'm going to be walking through how to design, how to deliver, but also how to operationalize an AI capability uplift and training program. My goal and my hope is that each one of you can walk away from this presentation with an understanding of how to map the AI literacy in your organization. But then what kind of training to actually provide to the engineers and the people on the ground, so that they can start using

AI and address the adoption gap that we've seen.

But before I go on, you know, why should you listen to me? Why do I have that kind of an interest or relevant experience in this case. As a quick background, I was a civil engineer at ACOM, so I worked in pavements in aviation from a design side but also in construction. So railway projects and aviation projects. I've also worked in innovation, so I was embedded in a government infrastructure authority, working on AI training and capability uplift programs. What we did is we

designed and delivered workshops, and we rolled them across our entire organization. I've also been writing and newsletter called Last Week in Contact, which just helps people to stay up to date with what's going on in the news, in construction tech, and then I'm currently right now, I'm on sabbatical, so helping out as platform lead and head of content for former labs, which is an accelerator program backed by

brick and mortar ventures. And my personal interest in education actually comes from a previous life before construction, where I worked for a company called AirDev, which was a software agency, and we built education programs to help people to learn and understand, um, low code systems, and we ultimately had over 10,000 people come through our bootcamps and be trained and working on our client projects.

So knowing that

how do we actually build an AI capability uplift program. So for all of you, I want to walk you back to us 2 years ago, where we recognized this problem where we knew AI was coming. We knew that it was starting to be used in our organization, but we didn't know how to actually increase the adoption. So after brainstorming and after workshops, we came to the solution that to increase adoption in a safe and responsible way. We need a structured training program, and it's really

important to do this in AEC for multiple reasons. Number one, what we found is there isn't existing training that's tailored to our project contexts. So a lot of the training we saw was like by OpenAI by Claude, by YouTube creators, but none of it actually understood the realities of projects. Number 2, what we also started to realize is that as a government infrastructure authority, we had a lot of confidential data, and we have a lot of concerns in terms of how we operate in the public domain. Every extern

al provider that we tried to ask or work with didn't have that context, didn't understand how AI guidelines, and we couldn't actually engage with them effectively. So due to that

what we developed is a five-step framework on how we would build a program. So for us walking through it, step one was about assessing capability. You need to understand where AI literacy is and where AI adoption is today. Number 2 is to map personus. So what I'm going to show you is how we grouped people into broad categories, and then how we developed training specific to those categories so that we could upskill them and they could move up in terms of how much they're adopting A

I We then trained them in AI literacy and then what we also realized is that AI is constantly changing. In the last couple of months we see AI agents being deployed. We see Claude Kerac. We need to develop a way that our training is not only structured and formalized, but also dynamic to the new ways of work that AI is starting to bring about.

And then finally, we got really excited by how can we build citizen developers? So how do you build your power users? How do you empower them and how do you make them feel safe, um, and OK in responsible use.

So walking through step one here. Our first step is a survey, and I'm gonna walk you through the questions that we had. First question was simple. How often do you currently use AI? That's really valuable just to quickly understand kind of the AI literacy level or the capability level of your organization.

Number 2 was, do you use AI as part of your work today. A lot of people might be using AI tools, but they might not feel comfortable to use it in your work context. So we wanted to understand the differences between these two answers.

Number 3, what we wanted to also understand is what is the biggest concern about using AI at work. A lot of people don't want to use AI work for a variety of reasons, and any training you need to do needs to handle those objections effectively. And then finally, what topics would you like to learn most about? So for us to gain adoption and to gain kind of

people actually using AI, it needs to be relevant and contextualized to their project context or to their specific use cases. And what I found was really interesting in the results.

Number one, we had all these concerns around losing their jobs and stealing data. People were actually very, very scared about using chat GPT or any other AI model at work because they were scared that they'd do a misstep. It'd be released to the media, which happened quite often in working in public authorities, and they lose their jobs. So we needed to address that proactively. We also realized that people just weren't sure they were allowed to, even though we'd had comms saying, you can use tooling, this is how to use it.

People still didn't know that how to use it

And then finally, one of the biggest challenges is where can I learn? Even if you care about AI, there actually isn't very many resources to go out there and land. There's a few people online, but you need to know about them. And inside your organization, you don't know, should I talk to the innovation team? Should I talk to the IT team? Who actually owns AI and who can I go to for help?

So based off this, what we did is we mapped an AI capability pyramid. And what I'm going to do is I'm gonna walk you through each level of this pyramid, and then how we developed training so that people could be increased in the skill level across this particular pyramid.

So we found that kind of 90 to 95% of our organization was an AI novice. And what an AI novice was, was someone who's actually never used AI before or was kind of scared and apprehensive due to security and data risks, and more than that, they weren't actually technical. They didn't necessarily understand the software backing behind this.

So what we did is we created training for them all around an AI crash course. So and a 101 to get started. And what we did is we would get them in a room, we'd get them to sign up to Chat GPT and we would get them to actually start using it with guided exercises, so they could see the value of how it works. You want people to have the tools in their hand, using it in a safe and secure way so that we reduce risk. And before we do that, we had some really quick theory. Number one was what is A

I and how does it work? You put in a prompt, you get information back, and what you write changes the answer. People needed to start to understand that.

Number 2 was addressing some concerns around strengths and limitations, so hallucination is one of the biggest concerns that we see people having. And if AI hallucinates, they stop using it. But we explained to them how it hallucinates, how to use a human in the loop system, but also understanding it's just a tool. It's a new tool in your tool set, and you need to know when and where to use it. If you don't know where to use it, you're not going to get adoption.

And then finally, we had to share our company guidelines. You know, how do we approach AI? What is safe and secure use? What are you allowed to upload and what you can't upload. And then finally, what we also do is we show the capability areas. So we mapped 4 different capability areas. We created guided tasks, demos, and exercises so that each individual in our workshop could walk through, start experimenting, and start to learn how to use AI, and all we want to do

with this cohort of people is to make them understand, make them to have the confidence to go, I can experiment with AI. I feel like I have an AI mandate, and I feel safe. I feel secure. I won't lose my job because I'm following the rules. And we clearly explained that to people.

After that, what we did is we had the AI explorers. So this is a cohort of people who I have some experience with AI tools, and they understand the basic concepts, but they haven't yet actually grained real value from it. And what I mean by that, it's not actually as a part of their daily workflow. So if we think back to some of the earlier presentations today, until you're starting to use it on a daily basis. You're not actually starting to see the productivity improvements that we want. So what

we started to do is we asked ourselves the question of how do we move from experimentation to habit, and the way we did that is by addressing some of our survey concerns of, you know, what do you want to use AI for. So we created use case specific training.

First was AI for writing. So how do you use it for emails? How do you use it to write reports? And how do you use it to improve clarity, especially our cohort of people. We had a large number of employees who used English as a second language, so helping them to write faster, helping them to review their work that is written by AI and giving them a process around doing that and training them, help them to feel safe in using it, but also understand when and where to use it.

The second one we do, which I think is really relevant, is also AI for Excel. So it's a very popular tool, of course, but we taught them how to generate formulas, um, and also what they can and can't upload. So very important to understand how to anonymize data before you upload it, because we were using free tools. We didn't have any commercial licenses at these points. So just teaching people the understanding around AI for Excel was incredibly valuable.

And then finally, at this stage is when we started to do what we call prompting 101. So for the explorer the novice cohort, we don't teach them about prompting, cause they don't understand, um, when you're experimenting, that prompting actually creates changes. But at this level where you've started to use AI, you understand the variability of output. You can teach different prompting frameworks, and we developed our own what we call the stingray model of how to work in a human in the loop way to get faster outputs

from AI. So at this level, we start doing prompting, and our entire goal here was to turn what was we saw as occasional use with AI into a very consistent workflow habit, so that people every time they open Excel, every time they stopped writing, they know exactly how to use AI, when to use it, and how to feel safe in using AI without leaking data, um, accidentally.

Now, the next phase and kind of what was exciting for us is the idea of an AI practitioner or what our term for what we saw as an AI power user. These are the people who regularly use AI, and it's embedded in their workflows. But the challenge and the truth is not everyone's going to be at this level. It tailors very quickly from novice to explorer to practitioner. It's the people who are curious and excited about using AI. For this group of people, we wanted them

to become power users. So we started to give really tailored training for them. First, we went to Business Lipecific. So a lot of them would be in specific business teams. We would survey them and create process maps of, hey, how do you do your work today? We then um understand how to integrate AI into that process map, so 20 steps to 5 steps or 6 steps using various tools, and we trained the entire team in these processes, using the people who are champions to, to showcase and validate what we were

saying.

We also created communities at this point in time, so small groupings of people who were really excited by AI, but they felt alone in the organization. Oftentimes the power users are the only ones in their teams, or the only two people in their teams who love AI and they don't have anyone to share that excitement with. So we found this to be a really effective way to distribute information. And then thirdly, what we actually found worked really well was AI office hours. So we'd sit in the lunchroom from 2 to 40 p.m. on a Wednesday.

and people would come to us and ask us questions. And we just get excited, we jam together for 20 minutes and we'd just be that AI coach for them because a lot of people wanted to get better, but they didn't know how to go for help. So by being that coach for them, we were able to build stronger ties across the organization, but also help to improve the capability of these people who could train other people as well.

Now, the final thing I want to note on this pyramid is the AI innovators. So these are people who are kind of part of our IT team and they're building bespoke AI projects. We're not really training these people, um, yeah, they know, you know, more than we do from a machine learning and a technical standpoint, but it's really valuable to understand they exist on this pyramid, and you can't tap into them to get their support and their engagement on our projects. And finally, I want to note that the goal isn't a, a make every single

person in AI expert. All we're trying to do is increase the general um capability of our organization. So someone who's never used AI can get a lot of value from experimenting and realizing, hey, I could use it in this way. And then once you have that, you want them to become explorers. How do you make it into a habit-formed activity. And in a smaller proportion of that are going to become our power users that we love and we kind of care about and we want to nurture so that they grow and they start teaching other people in their

teams. In the same way, we saw Xcel experts kind of exist in the organization, build templates. We started to see that with AI power users, or that was our dream.

And just to translate that into a reality over a 12 month program of how we did it. First, what we had is our AI novice group, so the AI 101 people. So initially we were running these workshops as quickly as possible at the start, just to increase the capability of the organization. And then,

what we start to notice is after about 3 months, we started to have enough people that they became AI explorers. So if there's 90 to 100 people trained in the first three months, maybe 20 to 30 start to graduate to the next cohort because they're using AI enough. So we start to give use case specific training. And by month 56, month 7, we start to get demand and pull demand from the business, from those first people who got so excited by AI they wanted the organization to

start using it more broadly. And then we also concurrently developed our power user community.

And that's really important and valuable because that was our way to send information throughout.

And before I go on, I wanna highlight something that I think's been touched on before, which is AI capability continues to increase at a rapid rate. And while we were kind of really proud and excited about our program. We realized very quickly that it's very static. So the time it takes us to develop a new kind of program or a new stream is often in the months. We've got to pilot it, we've got to test it, we've got to operationalize it. And what you start to realize is that A

I capability is actually increasing much faster than our ability to train. And there's this new term that OAI calls the capability overhang, where what they're seeing is that AI innovation is drastically outpacing our ability to adopt new tools and our ability to absorb capability inside of the organization. So to graphically represent that, what we see is that over time, AI capability is improving at an exponential rate. But

if you look inside of our organization, you're seeing that we're kind of improving at a linear rate. Just our ability to run workshops and the number of kind of trainings that we can do. So all of a sudden you have a capability overhang, a new tooling like Claude Koac or AI agents comes out, and we just don't have the ability to train people in this new tooling. So I guess the question that we had was how can we actually resolve this. And the way we did so

is by identifying the power users in every workshop and pulling them into their own community. So what we did is, in a workshop of 30 people, you'd start to watch for the people who are the most excited. So you notice 2 to 3 people who come after you, they ask you questions. They're naturally very curious. Um, they're naturally very excited, and it just clicks in their head. They're going, hey, I understand what AI is. I can see the value, um, that it brings to me, and they want to be more involved.

So for this power user group,

what we started to do is we started to build communities around them. So, we built like a Viva Engage for Microsoft. We also built a teams community for them.

And then finally, we created like a weekly AI bulletin, and all we were doing was capturing the benefits of the new kind of technology of AI and contextualizing it to our roles, to our company, and to our industry. And for people that was really valuable for us, because what we're doing is we're exposing our workforce to new capability changes. So we saw that these people were really curious and they'd start to naturally experiment with new tooling. And then we also saw that they'd start to adapt

any ideas that we presented to them that were really interesting to their teams. And because they're naturally very curious and excitable people, they would tell their teams when they saw like an AI agent actually do something valuable, specific to their use case. And because we already gave them the scaffolding and the foundation on how to use AI safely and responsibly. They knew that this would work, but they'd also ask us. They'd drop in on AI uh NI AI office hours and ask us, how does this work? How can I actually use this

in my organization or in my team.

And then finally, what we started to notice is we started to map these people across our organization, and it was really interesting because we start to realize that these people didn't actually exist, kind of in one team, rather they sat cross-functionally across the organization. And what it allowed us to do was to have a delivery mechanism that was more dynamic, so that we could apply AI teachings, AI trainings, and give it to the most engaged users and the most engaged

subsets within our organization and you know, I hope, um, is over time is that we can improve the organizational adoption by seeing what resonates, what works in a faster rate. We can iterate faster and then operationalize and create workshops when it actually matters or when we're seeing, hey, this new capability is actually gaining resonance within the organization.

So I guess to end it and where I wanted to finish up is where we started, which is, you know, our AI future is already here, and it's being actively applied on AEC projects and across the organization.

But when we, we move further ahead, for us, the winners are gonna be those who are able to actually utilize and actually adopt AI across their organization. So for us and for me, I hope you took some something out of this presentation, and I hope that you can build out and support the people who are just as excited, just as curious to to use AI and want to start using it today in their projects. Thank you.

Thank you so much, Pagan, and it's never easy to engage so many people at this time, but I think you did a brilliant job, and I believe and trust there are a lot of questions here in the room that you would like to ask first, and I see already a hands up here at the front.

Oh

excellent talk, mate. That was awesome. Um, I meant to ask this in an earlier session, but I feel like it applies really well here. Um, it was the AI CEO AI handbook sessions, so, um, how did you align the the incentives of the organization to encourage

AI adoption. And the reason why I think this is interesting and we talk about culture and all the rest of it. And yeah, it's nice to feel good about it, but some people are coming up with like brilliant IP here that just is owned by somebody else, and I'm kind of curious how, was there any consideration for that? Like, push them out and create

Yeah, it's, it's a massive challenge. So I think we, we also have the presentation earlier about culture and how people were really excited to experiment. We were in a challenging place because we were a public facing organization. So government organization traditionally very slow to adopt technology. One major concern we had was data leaks. So we'd had in the previous years, a number of people kind of speaking to the media and it looking really badly on the organization, so we were really

scared about that. Um, and I don't know if you watched the show Utopia in Australia, which is like, um, it's a show or a satire about working in government, and basically we have like ownership by committee. And one of the biggest challenges we had was getting the organization aligned in backing us to actually give us the mandate to own AI training. So we went really consultanty on it. So we actually created a SWAT analysis of all the key players and the key stakeholders and tried to figure out how we could either

partner with them or how we could find, figure out how our strengths would support kind of the challenges that they had. And we individually held meetings with all of these people. We tried to get engagement. We had some detractors who we basically just had to go over their heads to try and get executive level buy-in. So it was incredibly challenging because we had almost every single team wanting to get buy-in. We basically, yeah, literally mapped out the people, what they're like what we, what value we could provide to them, what they

were scared about, because some teams were scared that they had the AI mandate, and if we had the mandate, we would kind of steal their jobs. So we had a lot of political considerations to navigate, so we got as much buy-in as we could. We ran pilots with the people who were brought in to get really good grass level support. And then we could show that to the executive who went, Well, you're the only ones who are actually doing this. We'll give you the mandate and to move forward. So, yeah, it's very different depending on whether you're getting the top-down support. We had some top-down, but we had to build bottom

- up support. Um, and like one cheeky trick was, we got all the executive assistants to all the execs, like, to all the execs to come into our training. They loved it, and then they told all the executives. So that was a really good way that we could get a mandate, because we kind of showcased, hey, we're doing something real. And all the people that they talk to on a daily basis were telling them how valuable it was.

I think it was answered very well. And also to get the audience that's joining us remotely on board. Let me ask you a question Bragan, here from uh from online remote first. um

so the question has a twist. So at the beginning it's saying AI adoption is great, right? So the program that you're doing is showing like, OK, more people are getting enthusiastic.

But on the downside of it, it also means there are more use cases being evolving from there. So how are you going to prioritize then the use cases that are coming out of the increase of adoption. Yes, so the innovation team within the organization was pretty sophisticated. So we had 3 teams. Um, our team was kind of doing an AI mandate, but we'd also be like idea generation. We also had, um, an R&D team that worked with Pilot Solutions, so they were working with startups to pilot them actively on projects. And

then we had a third team that was focused on scaling. Once we saw the ROI on a particular project, they could scale it across the organization. Um, well, what happens here is you kind of give the scaffolding for people to understand how to use AI. The question becomes, how do you actually figure out what's working, what has the ROI, and then how to scale it. We already had that existing innovation pathway because we were working with startups. So if that was the case, we could throw them over to our other teams, who then could create the process map

build out an AI champion, actually start to pilot in and other teams and other projects, and then we had the scaling team whose job was to actually scale an application. So I guess for us it was a little different because we already had kind of history because that project had, I think, had an innovation team for 7 or 8 years at that point in time.

And you have the free choice. One more question is allowed. So who do you choose? I think there was a question over there.

No, yeah, thank you. So I'm just wanted to confirm whether I'm right or wrong because my understanding of your presentation is there is a like, that's like step back before we start like talking about adaptation gap is my understanding is there's assumption behind this gap from your presentation, which is the key barrier of this adaptation is people.

not the infrastructure, not the culture. Am I right? Because my understanding in the company that I'm working and I'm trying to apply AI is not people because people are really interested and the culture is also there. The support is there. The data team is there. The problem is within infrastructure and the data is not that ready, but the people are.

Yeah, so I can give a bit more of a framing for like our specific context. So I guess being government, we had curiosity, but we had a lot of fear, um, and culturally we were naturally slower to adopt and utilize technology and what we actually did with this training program is we didn't have any commercial licenses. So like not even from a data perspective, we didn't have a chatGPT commercial license. We didn't have a co-pilot commercial license. That was in the works, but it was going to take at least 6 to 12 months with government procurement cycl

es and like we were owning that and we were doing that, but, um, what we did is, because we started noticing people using Chat GPT is we actually gave out this training for free chat GPT. So no commercial license. How do you use free AI tools which are kind of taking your data to train themselves. How do you use them in a safe, secure way. So where the chatGPT, co-pilot Claude, and we believed that there was a lot of use cases that from just writing emails to using Excel, that isn't the

core engineering competency, but still provides a lot of value. And given the fact that we were a delivery infrastructure authority. We also had other teams like legal, finance, commercials, marketing, um, that also could get a lot of value. So I think the infrastructure point is really important, and I've seen at kind of at other companies, you know, who should we use as a hyperscale provider is a big conversation, but at, at, at the core thing, like

AI models, chat GBT, they provide value to any professional. An engineers have tasks outside of their core competency of what's billable, that they can provide value in. And we were just going, hey, we know this provides value. How do we contextualize it to our industry, to our organization, and then how would we deliver that so people can use it in a safe way. So people were curious, but there was a lot of resistance, believe it or not, just being government. We had people come up to us when we'd do AI office hours and kind of like have a go at us

and just be like, hey, like, do you think it's going to take our job? Like, we don't want to lose our jobs. It's government, the, the culture was very different to, you know, when I'm at ACO and it's private sector, there's this recognition you have to improve, um, in government, we, yeah, there were some people who were very anti what we were doing.

Thank you so much and I think the program is very clear or like the steps that you took um.

I was expecting, I also, so I think that one or other like executive when you had the slide was the 11% of confidential data is being exposed in our organization already uh typing to their fellows like we need to do something about that as well. Um, so I would love to hear there later also something more from the others, but no, we don't have any more time to continue, but police are very, very, very loud applause for Bragan.

Thank you.

Thank you.

All right, uh, then it's time to move to the last section of the

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

At the AI in AEC 2026 event, the keynote session "From Curiosity to Capability: Upskilling Teams for AI Adoption in Construction," presented by Simon Oster and Bhragan Paramanantham, explored strategies for overcoming barriers to AI adoption in the construction industry. Bhragan, a civil engineer with experience at AECOM and government infrastructure innovation, shared his expertise in designing AI training programs tailored to industry-specific challenges. He highlighted the AI adoption gap, citing Placer Solutions statistics that revealed 74% of individuals use tools like ChatGPT and Claude regularly, yet 68% of companies remain unprepared for AI-driven disruption. The Dodge Construction Network survey underscored fears of data leaks, with over 10% of users accidentally exposing sensitive information, a critical concern in industries handling confidential project data and intellectual property.

To address these challenges, Bhragan introduced a five-step AI capability uplift framework, emphasizing assessment, persona mapping, literacy training, dynamic adaptation, and fostering citizen developers. He detailed the AI capability pyramid, categorizing users into novices, explorers, practitioners, and innovators, with tailored training programs for each group. Novices received crash courses on safe AI use, while explorers were trained in use-case-specific applications like AI for writing, Excel, and prompting techniques using the Stingray model. Practitioners, or power users, were empowered through business-line-specific process mapping, AI office hours, and community-building initiatives like Viva Engage and the AI bulletin.

The session also addressed cultural resistance in government organizations, referencing the Australian satire "Utopia" to illustrate challenges such as fear of job loss and slow adoption rates. Bhragan shared how executive assistants played a pivotal role in gaining leadership buy-in by showcasing the practical benefits of AI adoption. He outlined the innovation team's structure, which included idea generation, R&D, and scaling efforts to prioritize high-ROI use cases. The concept of capability overhang was introduced, highlighting how AI innovation, including tools like AI agents, is outpacing organizations' ability to adopt new technologies.

By identifying and nurturing power users, organizations can bridge this gap and accelerate adoption. The session concluded with a call to action, urging attendees to invest in structured training programs, empower AI champions, and leverage platforms like Viva Engage to drive adoption across their teams. As Bhragan emphasized, while AI's future is already here, its benefits will only be fully realized by those who prioritize capability-building and responsible use.

Speakers

BP

Bhragan Paramanantham

-

AECOM / Last Week in ConTech

SO

Simon Oster

-

Arcadis

================================================================================
SESSION 8: Session 5 PANEL: Impact of Agentic AI in AEC Value Chain
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

Rammble

Hello, Anna. Nice to see you all here and nice to be here also with you. It has been very interesting and good presentation, so.

let's see how our, our panel discussion will continue after this, uh, uh, shortly about myself, I'm a um Sarah Port, uh, in Phoenixive Association of Silins and heirs, and I'm working in Rammol, uh, and leading buildings business area there here in Finland.

And what about you, Carla? You have been also

I have been there. Yeah, I have already been in states, but for the ones who wasn't the the earlier session, so my name is Carla Valca I'm working as a venturing lead for Turance Group, which is a European 3000 employee engineering consultancy, but I'm representing the innovation leg of uh our organization, which is building in-house technology, uh, and the business models for the future. And uh why we do that is due to the fact that uh we have a structure of trust where we need

to follow the mission of benefit the whole AEC industry with our innovations, practically putting all our profits on, on, on that work. So very, very, very interesting day for me, but, uh, I, I think one of the highlights, uh, I would say is that we have so broad variety of uh content presenters. We have started from the future views and there is AI adoption, uh, discussed in multiple places. We have

gone very deep in demos and uh technologies and now hopefully we can, uh, summarize it well with this panel discussion starting, but Anina, before we get there, and I believe our setup starts to be ready. We decided that, uh, uh, or we were asked kind of to have a stand-up committee, but we are not this good potentially doing that. So we are filling it up. But what has been your highlight of the day so far. Uh, there has been accidentcent because I'm learning. I'm an art specialist in this area, so it has been very interesting learnings on

topics and something to bring to my own work and our organization also, so.

that's, that has been made a highlight and of course the meat meat.

all of you and have a interesting discussions, but now I think our panelists are here already. So, uh, maybe we would like uh start with them.

Yeah, maybe we can go to the stages first and then we can introduce you one by one, coming up. So if you wait, wait a second, so we get a bit of atmosphere here for the stars of the show, so to say, but, uh, OK, you can take that right and I, I, I will be here.

But yeah, uh, to get started, we had a very, very inspirational, uh, keynote session in the morning and we are really, really happy to have the long term out of desk long-term academia, and today a founder of Yekatec, uh, a consultancy agency, Dr. Sam Soharan as one of our panelists. Let's give big applause.

And then we have Akimer, senior Technology director from Trimble.

Welcome

And then, uh, another doctor, uh, coming from Arkad is one of the largest engineering agencies in the world which treat 30,000 employees directly from the

Netherlands with a German accent. Uh, let's give back applause to

And then we have a maybe uh uh you have a pin on the states, I think, uh, today. So some sort uh safe strategy officer from Spe of Sweden, or welcome here. Thank you.

Yeah

So let's get started. Uh, we have divided this uh panel into 4 sections, uh, and, uh, because AI is quite a lot of hype as such, we will start from the present state, something concrete, something that really is happening and then we move step by step, uh, more the year we are living and in the end,

you get the hype and everybody gets a good feeling before the dinner for the night we can continue hyping and uh feeling good together. But uh before even those sections, let's start with a short warm up and, uh, for every one of you, you get a chance to introduce yourself through a double question. So how long you have experience with AI and uh on a scale from 1 to 100, what is your AI enthusiasm level. Right now or in general, but

we'll start from some. Uh, so as we discussed earlier this morning, my first interaction with AI goes back to 2022016 and it was about like how we can leverage generative AI, not in this context like LLMs, but in terms of the design itself and also how we can use machine learning and finding out, so my background is AEC, but uh my project was in terms of the manufactur

ing how we can use machine learning to figure out the type of material, the 3D printing machine, which was a hot topic back in time and making sure the part that we printed has the same level of tensile strength, um, as, uh, what we design and and how it can perform. The level of anxiety that you mentioned, if that's OK, I'm not going to give you the number, but I would say that's enough that I dream AI sometimes and also

um

I'm excited for what's coming, uh, for us next and um sometimes I'm thinking about past revolution like industrial uh revolution or internet, and I feel like this time I'm with the new wave of innovation, and this time I understand it. I'm part of it, and that makes me excited.

I leave the number to you, so.

yeah, it's, it's completely fine. This is supposed to be, uh, open answers, but uh, yeah, I can, I can even

say that I dream of AI sometimes. So then we are too, but let's move to Kimba. Um, so I would say that 2019 is when I started getting engaged with uh AI through machine learning the first time for, I mean, of course, been following the field before that, but, but really kind of getting into the details of the matrices and all of the kind of basics. So I would have an understanding of what's actually going on. And, uh, so, and, and now for the last 3 years.

roughly been deeply involved in how we develop both internal and externally our AI tooling and I've been.

trying to be an ambassador for, for utilizing AI and um

Can we get a number? Yes, you will get a number. So as I said, I'm a bit of an AI noob, so I'll start with a 101. So 101 let's give up all for that.

I actually started in the same year, so 2016, uh, was a time where I was working on one of my first research papers as a co-author. I was training in uh simple neural network for prediction model, uh, 100% accuracy to figure out one hour later the training and test data was mixed, but uh that also brings me a little bit to my enthusiasm level. I was expecting I had the highest number today, but, uh, 100, so you're already overruled.

Um, but I also need to say, uh, some mornings I'm waking up with 100, and then I look in my inbox and it just drops to a single digit, so it's a, it's a rollercoaster, um, but I think the median is like growing over time and it's pretty nice to see.

Yeah, so I, I think uh

like many others, I started using AI at Christmas 22.

like right around the time when Sha GPT had come out and you knew about it, but I hadn't tested it and my brother-in-law showed it

like over Christmas dinner and we started doing Christmas rhymes on it. And that was pretty much the first.

um AI interaction I had. And uh in terms of excitement, uh, I don't know, I would say half of me, like the professional side is very

thinks it's really fun to experiment and find this technology really exciting, but like personally, I'm not too excited to be honest. Like it's too, I have too much

concern about like

fake news and crime and fraud and the future of humanity, and I, whenever I see on LinkedIn that someone writes that 70% of white collar work will disappear in 2028. I don't think that's a great

like outcome for

humanity. So,

are you scared? Are the chief strategy officer is going to disappear. No, not at all. I don't worry too much about that. I just mean that people, I think people need meaning in their lives and going to work is part of the meaning and having a, you know, colleagues and job.

Indeed, indeed

So I, I don't know, unweighted average is 50.

OK, that's a good number. But uh before we uh continue the current uh continuing this uh panel discussion maybe uh something uh about the audience. You can ask uh questions, uh, end of this, uh, panel discussion system and uh during uh session, you can, uh,

uh write those through the that application uh.

and we need the machine actually here. I have it here, so all, all good on that. So if you have a question stirring the panel discussion uh please use that uh.

app. Yeah, we can take it directly to the program, uh, even before the end, but let's get to Dakota State.

What about the government state. We have now uh learning here and hearing that what, what is happening in different companies and in, in this uh

construction, uh, market and area, but how, what is your opinion? What is the like the current situation and uh it especially.

in terms of uh AI impact uh of a business and deliver, delivery models.

Who wants to start some, yeah, sure. So actually in the book Disrupted, there is like a pyramid that is mapping how AEC firms are reacting to AI and what their interaction is. And at the bottom, is those that they see AI as a hype and are just in the reactive mode and then it comes to like a tinker. There are many companies out there that they're trying to try

experiment with multiple AI tools that are out there and it's like, uh, following the shiny objects and I, um, I had a conversation this morning with someone else with Arnie who was talking about like um 1700 AI tools and

imagine that if you want to like experiment at least 1 person of these tools and how

pick fighting it could be for your employees, and on top of Explorer, Tinkerer, there is another layer that is um

like those that are adopter and since morning there were some sessions that they were talking about their strategy, how they looked at what their companies need and we looked at, we say they have inside out the strategy. What it means is they looked at their company, what's happening, what they need, their clients, the whole ecosystem, and based on that they go and look for a solution that can meet their needs, and they have like a strategy for that. We consider them the adopter section on top of that pyramid

is strategic innovators, and there aren't that many of them.

and those are strategic innovators, they're not just looking for AI tools, but they're looking for like how uh they can deliver value differently, create value and deliver value differently to their clients and also they're looking at different workflows that is not just around human itself, but it's based on what's possible today. So if I want to summarize it, the status of AR reaction is along the whole spectrum from like not that

much reaction to what's happening to Tinker, to adopter, and also a strategic innovators.

Do you, oh sorry.

No, no, please, please continue.

Yeah, I think I'm actually called on the audience. So, uh, show of hands, raise your right hand if you're using AI tools nowadays, almost daily in your work.

What about them privately also during weekends.

If I would have asked this question 2 years ago, Ivan, maybe a few hands would have showed up in my typical audience when doing a technology overview. So I think, uh, well, of course, this is a bit of an exclusive group, but still, even, even with, with the early adapters, uh, I would say that

yeah, now everybody is experimenting and seeing daily benefits from it already.

Are we done yet? Absolutely not. I think we're just in the beginning of of what we can do with this, but we have seen some awesome presentations today from vendors, from, from construction companies, engineering companies, what they are trying out currently.

A lot of people said that this has not been rolled out yet, but I think that's just a question of time.

So.

That's good. I can completely agree. Maybe elaborating a bit, bit from there, um,

if we get to the value chain and, and there was a good quote from some the first sentence almost that there is no Roy, there is no return of investment, and of course it's easy to put those things because very many of the things are dynamic and you cannot directly see them on the top line or bottom line. Uh, but that's where we need to get to actually make this transformation to happen, but, but where that, uh, transformation should start, start from

the buyers, owners, developers who start from consultancies, software companies, consultants coming to this and putting people in inspiration or how do you see it we can start from Simon. I mean, I mean, we said now that um we have this pyramid, right, which is more like an organizational organogram, um, but I think also when we're looking at the ASC industry, um, we can also build it as a workflow, and I mean most of our workers are doing and it was the first question to the keynote as well, but

how are our, like the people at the frontline, what are they doing? You have like in this very simplified manner you have requirements and you go into a concept phase, then you do the design and then you do the building. And I think what we are seeing is that in each of these four phases you see that they are like isolated pilots currently being running, and that's also why I agree with you, Sam, that, um, of course we are not seeing that there's a full replacement of workers within anywhere time soon because we're still operating in a very, very complex system how we

are delivering like start to finish products and, um, yeah, I think that's where we are currently in. So we are running isolated pilots, but cross the full value chain already today and even on the weekends as I see here. But who, who could calculate it? Is it, is it a buyer, the one with the uh back of money whether it's public or private developer who's going to be the frontrunner? Yeah, like, like who needs to push the button to actually make this leap of faith happen really. Yeah, I

think we should not make ourselves smaller as we are, so often we are saying like, yeah, we are traditional industry. We are not a tech first company mindset, but Sam, you also mentioned it this morning, we need to rethink our organization. We need maybe to change the way we have operated now the last decade or maybe even more decades before. And I think that's extremely important for us because then we can differentiate, I think we have it in our hand because we have a very complex fragmented system. We are starting to work like in bits and pieces of all of these.

And it's our opportunity now to differentiate by connecting the dots and bringing people together and it was also Bragan who was saying we have champions across all functions. We have the same in the design and engineering workflow. You have champions who are in the architects field. You have champions and project management, not only the, um, I think was more like the enabling functions we call them. Yeah. So maybe if I would add to that then, so that your answer to the multi, this multi-option question is yes, all of us.

Yeah. But not tomorrow.

Maybe not tomorrow. What about you, son, your opinion?

So the state of AI, I think I can mostly speak for Swekov. Um, we decided very early that we, we need to make this technology available to everyone. So we launched what we call SEOGPT, which is basically a kind of vendor independent chat GPT in May 2023.

to everyone. And then we spent a lot of time working on getting the adoption up.

And now we are, I mean, similar to the figures we saw on the screen, 70-80% regular users if you include other tools as well.

Uh, we also see a lot of experimentation in the business, so a lot of people are

you know, trying to see how can I change the way I do my discipline or my work, for instance, we have

um

we have completely changed how we do groundwater calculations in Sweden, how we do tendering, but it's still at the pilot stage, and we believe the next kind of phase of adoption for us is to

to scale this up and you know, take a full discipline and change the entire workflow, how they're doing things.

Then on the client side, we see a lot of interest

so they are curious on how are we using AI and how does it benefit them?

Uh, and also some clients that ask us for help and, and say, you know, can you help us no AI journeys? and we do a lot of that work. We have a couple of products that we sell, AI products,

that's not

it's a good start. I think we are, we've come a long way in 3 years' time, but we're not there yet.

We also see clients that are asking you for lowering the prices?

I mean mostly that happens internally, so a lot of the consultants who are used to selling ours.

they say, oh, now I saved 10 hours. And then they still

charge the same hourly fee as they did before because they're so used to selling ours. I think there's also something that needs to change the behavior of, you know, judging your value by the hours is very strong, so.

And I mean that's also what we have seen right in the previous years that when we're just working on these pilots and isolation, we may say few one hour there 2 hours. But then sometimes the executive or leadership is saying, well, we are actually just buying the employees a cappuccino because we are don't seeing the ROI yet. I don't agree with this, with this statement, but still it's a question like how can we do more with less, um, and not just like saving the one or other hour like in between, yeah.

That's a big challenge

I was going to say that it's like a gear system. If you have 1 gear out of 3 of them running fast, then the system will break, so we need to consider the whole network effect if we are making, I'm going to go back to that proposal because this is one of the most common use cases that is just popping up. And if we make the proposal process like faster, but the rest of the the design team is not ready. They don't have capacity. Then the construction, and then

fabricating part, like the whole ecosystem, it doesn't help, right? We're just ending up with the pipeline of projects that we want to pick up, but we don't have enough resources. We don't have the capacity. So it's like that gear system. If one gear is turning, the rest of them should be coordinated with that, otherwise the whole system will brag, basically need to speed up the construction process as well site. That's one is like, yeah, that's honestly. Do we have a color any questions from audience?

So check. Yeah, we need to be back. I was waiting that this is, but it came uh right when we moved to this second chapter, but, um, it's a bit a long question, but I can try to uh summarize it, um.

you were commenting your enthusiasm level and uh there were comments in the audience earlier that then do you see us some can't be actually really high and it's getting higher and higher and people are using this in private life. Um, but then organization have only this and that much resources and investment power, and they need to prioritize, so they need to say, you are not doing your AI thing or your use case is not valuable, or that. So do you have some uh kind of uh

view or tip even for that that that.

how to not to kill their enthusiasm.

uh, of the people who might have it when you need to say no to many things that might might appear there or is it even a proper?

I think it's a huge problem from the perspective that indeed it's extremely important to approach those use cases, the right use cases, and on the other hand, I think it's something that everyone from us can very easily fix already on Friday. You just need to think about a process. So,

you need to understand like how do you gather like the use cases from

yeah, your people, your employees, then you might need to have like an instance in place who's making the final, who who's making the first call, whether this is actually an acceptable use case for the specific service line and then it goes also to the technical team who is then making a feasibility analysis.

But the nice thing about today is that when you hand it over then to the technical team, they can way, way, way faster than a few years ago, like implemented like in a pilot phase so they can test it very fast and that also means they can fail way faster. And if you have this process in place like an innovation pipeline, however you're setting this up.

but where you let like the use cases come in or you have some people in place who are responsible for reviewing them on specific criterias that you have set specific to your company, and then you're handing it over to the technical team and give them a very, very specific timeline to do like the first innovation phase of implementation. Just say 4 weeks. If you don't see any results within 4 weeks, probably you won't see them in 3 months.

What about Kim? How are you prioritize your product roadmap. Everybody is interested here that uh they need a lot then you deliver a debate with product management. Uh, no, but I mean, uh, I mean, that's uh also for product management, everything speeds up what they can do now, how quickly they can get an MRD or PRD out, uh, and, uh, be kind of because product management is always quite overworked with, with getting the customer like require

ment s and then put it into a form that engineering can work with it. They now have quite powerful tools. So we have seen some really rapid now going from 0 to launch products in like less than a year.

which

was quite unheard of still a few years ago, especially with more complex software, um, so,

yeah, I would say that uh

so far

as and as some of the examples we showed with Henry earlier today. Uh, we have done quite a lot of different things with different tech stacks and so on. And now we are moving more towards unifying the platform and doing that kind of plumbing so that then the individuals can contribute on on what they are the experts on and bring that then to the table and, and create the agents that then will help our customers and, and focus on that, uh, so.

I would say that uh you need to, at some point, you need to kind of, OK, well, now we can't do 7 different chat interfaces anymore. Let's unify. Let's, this is now kind of common thing, uh, but, um

but then there are new things coming out. I mean, you wake up every morning, open up a YouTube and depending on what rabbit hole you are in, I'm pretty badly in the AI rabbit hole, so you look at what happens in academia, what companies are doing. They might be 5 new innovations coming just during a weekend or 10.

And so, like someone said, it's really hard to, to follow all the development.

at the moment and the gap that was just presented in the previous presentation as well about training and like how quickly this evolves, so.

Yeah.

I can

kind of feel it, feel it myself sometimes it feels that

boating is no longer a profession. There is a quest, oh, you've got a microphone already, let's take the question. We, we need to move in a minute, but uh let's, let's have it. Go ahead.

OK. Thank you very much. Um, I think what is interesting, especially here in Europe and now for construction companies is

where is the data going? Uh, where do we store the data? In former times, we knew exactly where to store the data because we knew the server.

So I'm especially interested in um the Chitipe from Svio. So how do you host it? How do you organize the safety and security, especially

construction is quite an important business in Europe.

and also vulnerable in the future, especially in times like this. So how do you save where the data is going?

So first of all, I'm not a technical person, so I don't know how they implementation is done, but they are, the, the way it's built from what I understand is that no data is sent.

to OpenAI or Anthropic or anything. We hosted uh ourselves and we have kind of a contained solution for it. That was the main reason actually for setting it up in the first place because we saw that the risk of losing data was very high. But I don't know exactly technically how it's implemented.

So we had a chat just before, uh, this Spanish session and uh was to do some commercial forcadas. We also have an Arcade GPT. It was very similar adoption numbers that we figured out. Um, yeah, and how do we do this? I mean, we have a cloud governance, uh, we have basically in our company like Azure First Sack, in there, you can also host the proprietary LLM models, and that's exactly like the front endarca GPTO whether it's like or GPT is connecting and speaking to, but what you have around this

here, you have the governance, right? And so you really ensure that there's no

this is not this room, right? No? OK. So you have no, uh, technically saying no egress, so everything is ingress, everything remains inside. Nothing gets exposed outside. Also so no one from the outside will have access to swecoGPT or AKGPT if you don't have our device, if you don't have basically our, uh, security levels installed on the device, we even have a functionality because we do a lot of defense and security projects, which is even, even stricter, and then you can create uh

an instance for your team or for your projects. So your, even your project data stays within the

project folders and not doesn't live. And, and that's such a nice example because um I think we had exactly the same speed, so we also had like June, so you were one month earlier, so June 2023 we launched a KGBT. We were learning together with Seligo. We were learning together with privacy based on this one application, where do we go with our journey? 3 months later we had a first AI policy. We never had this before. This was the baseline for this was the Acha GPT actually. So also like the other

teams that were coming together on this journey really learned from this, yeah, in-house built system.

So would this be one of the solutions in the future for Europe to have a European AI policy, especially for construction.

I don't know

I think it's more maybe just generic, uh, I mean generic AI policies, so not kind of regulation based, which is very good at doing. Uh, sometimes to a fault, uh, and then, yeah, like I mentioned, AI policies of the companies that it's really important to have that A governance, well defined, uh, when you do all of this, but otherwise, like it's just like any other cloud solution, uh, sure, I mean, no, I don't think anyone is running there the large models in-house as such.

but they have a private instance then within Microsoft or Google Cloud or AWS, uh, and, uh, and then it's resides within an EU country, for example, or in the US if if you work with US customers, um, so basically the same security that for any if you have used a common data environment because the only way to collaborate usually is through the cloud so same security protocols.

Good. Um, yeah, thank you for all the questions. There are questions coming in the in the app. So, so let's move uh using one of them to the

2026, the

near future and this year, um, but, um, the question is that uh

is the markets ready

for the shift

I is, is the market like really showing that this shift can be done because you need money to actually do this shift and then continuing from there is that what should we do in 206 to

make the market ready. We have kind of touched it a bit, but if we really look at it from the perspective that what needs to happen in 2026 in the value chain that this will take a leap forward.

Any hypothesis on that

Well, I could maybe start, I mean, one of the things that it will definitely change is this how, how the business value is defined. Like I said, you're selling still ours, but if you can do the same work in 10% of the time, 20% of the time, then you can do a lot more and hopefully then you do more or more detailed, uh, uh, with the, with the same number of people or even more, I would say that AI should be thought of as a a force multiplier like we mentioned, uh, where individuals can

contribute much more than now. And there's a lot of thoughts that we don't do now because of lack of time. So we can, I think, increase quality, make the designs better so they are more constructible, easier to do. So I, I would say that there's, there's a lot of opportunities there, and we already see innovators now, uh, customers that are not waiting for software vendors to deliver, well, XEco is doing a lot of interesting things, science in it, and so on, and globally even small companies are doing

uh, so, so

we are already see initious and, and even larger parts where where

the value is seen that hey, this is, this is real. This is something that really helps us brings in more money, allows us to do more contracts and so on, like you mentioned in the in the bidding process that ifA can make that faster, uh, or we can, we can't find the most lucrative ones, for example, work with those, so.

I think we're, we're seeing small chunks now, but bigger opportunities are still ahead.

So it's the market, uh, sorry, please go ahead. Yeah, I was about to ask, what do you think? Is the market ready?

Well I think what we still need to continue focusing on option, getting people on board and learning and so on.

Uh, I think it's time to start looking a bit more at our core processes and how we can transform those. And then one of our basic assumptions is that we don't know where innovation will happen if it's, you know, with us, with our clients, if it's software providers, if it's the foundational models or startups. So you need to be very, very open and technology agnostic and try everything.

Amen. I was going to say that you brought people from 36 countries here, right? So it shows that people already and trying to navigate what to do.

and also besides that, to what you mentioned uh about like clients itself. So if

we don't use AI, our clients, they will use and in some cases they may check uh the quality of our work in terms of consistency and quality, and that if there's any issue in it, it would hurt Troth and

the question is like how we can use AI to increase the quality of our work.

that we submit to our clients in terms of documentation drawings, um, design to make sure that it's in a high quality. So when the clients are checking it out, uh, it's aligned with their standards. So the point here is like

that besides the technology push itself, there is like a push from the client side as well, and maybe that's why HNTB, they're doing that research with dots in the US because that is the clients of AEC firms and they're trying to figure out what to do, what AI means to them. And that's going to be expanded across the whole ecosystem itself.

Yeah, maybe

I could complement this session with another question. There's also a very good question from the uh audience, uh, saying that AI is kind of

illuated. You put AI on everything and, and uh many things and that's probably

all what we know, but that's a breach from, from there getting you the

what in my opinion, at least AI is different when it comes to being a technology. It's the automation and scale. uh, and what, what that can bring differently than just supporting incrementally something that uh we are doing, um, but it all is based on the data, whether the data is

documented or whether it's knowledge that is undocumented data, so data quality has been questioned here even in the latest session, uh, but let's assume that it, it would be good. So,

what is the most valuable data in this value chain because I would claim that not all data is valuable.

There's a lot of data in this value chain, but there's a question, do we even need all that? And in your opinion, what is the most valuable data and where it where it is.

Yeah, please go, um, I would say it depends on the opportunities, and it could defer company by company. Let's say uh you're going to have a party and you're going for grocery shopping, and when you go to the store, you don't buy the whole store, right? You have like some items in mind uh for the dinner and let's say uh you want to cook pasta and you buy a chicken, God forbidden pasta with chicken

You buy chicken and then you get a, a pasta itself and go back home and suddenly you remember, oh, I was going to make pasta with ground beef, right? So that AI is like a recipe for how you look for the data itself. So if you want to like um some companies they're jumping in to have like data lake or centralize the data itself, and the question is does it worth it or not? What if we do the targeted because with AI agents we may not need that

centralization at all or to some extent we don't need it in this scale itself, and

depending on the opportunities that you're tackling at your company, what are those data that you need, and that could be our starting point and take it from there. And I don't think that we can say like this data is valuable because it depends on the op opportunity, it depends on the company, it depends on the goal that we're trying to achieve and we kind of started from there rather than boiling the whole ocean.

I think we're all agreeing that yeah, high data quality is extremely important for all the use cases that we are running.

Um, yeah, there's no general answer to which data is now extremely important, but I think everyone here in the room, at least the people who have to work with stakeholders also know the situation where it's set like, well just now do the magic because all the data is there and then you ask them where's the data and then they're saying in SharePoint and this is just a data dump, right? So I think we should not simplify this. It's a huge effort, especially for large organizations. We also discussed this before. Um, this is something that you need to set as a priority as well.

So get your data ready, have like a data strategy, have like a real data team. This is something that you should not forget about. These large language models itself, they are trained on past data. They have no knowledge about your business model. They have no knowledge about your clients. They have no knowledge about your employees. Um, so where you start to fix the issue, that's something you need to figure out, maybe also misuse cases you have frauditized, but if you see yourself like in a situation where you see our data is disconnected, outdated. This is something that you need

to fix. And this is something you cannot fix on a Friday. Uh, this is something which takes long-term effort and investment.

I could maybe give you two examples of

valuable data

data that machines can understand.

that then it needs to be good enough that they're the machine is very exact and if it's ambiguous, then yeah, you get better end results. Be it a robot or like something in a in a fab shop or, or on the field in the future. I mean, we'll see robotics in the future.

which leads to the other, uh other important topic which Nvidia has brought out, and that is Si ready data, data that is then available for simulation, so that's rich enough that you can run all kinds of simulations based on that data and, and uh that is kind of

something that if you want to bury uh concrete examples of

but

yeah, and then maybe the third one could actually be what is needed for maintenance.

uh, because that's actually where most of the costs in buildings come from maintenance design very small part construction a bit bigger, maintenance, huge.

And so I got a 11 hand clap.

Hey baby go more to the future and uh

uh how this whole like uh is a sector look like, for example, 2030. And what is the value network, how do you say this, what is the

what will happen, what is the future, where we are in the

in, in uh

that time

And now we want predictions like I can start. We'll start with the strategy.

So, so separating two things, the what and how. If you start with the what, a lot of the things that we do today, a lot of the hours we sell, we won't be able to sell. I mean, they will be worthless in the

in the future

Uh, just like, I mean, that has been in development for the last 30 years. We had a lot of people drawing on paper, and we don't have that anymore, and we don't sell that service anymore.

So a lot of the hours we sell today will, we will not be able to sell.

That we need to replace with something else.

Um

the easy answer would be that there would be enough price elasticity and demand so we can just sell more of the same, but it's probably not likely. We'll probably have to do some innovation on top and, and deliver new services. And I believe a lot of that will be digital, like AI powered services.

And then they how, if you look historically at the value chain.

you know, 50 years ago we had architects first.

and then they handed over their work to, you know, structural engineers, and they handed over the work to MEP and it was all very sequential and, and took a very long time. And over time this value chain has been

pushed more together and it's more iterative. So if you do like um

industrial project, it's not always the architects who lead it. It can be the process engineers, or if you do um

uh something within sustainable industry. It could be more iterative. Uh, and I believe

one of the outcomes could be if every of these steps is much more efficient and have better tools.

you know, everything gets pushed together and they can work more in, you know, cross-functional teams, more like agile software development and sit in the same room, sit with the client, and iterate together.

And I think that might be a change in, in the kind of entire chain that happens.

It's a positive outlook. I was, I was prepared for the worst case, no. Um, go ahead. It's good to have a confrontation. Go, go deep.

No, I mean, we are now aligned, um, I, I see very similar. I think what you mean was like the delivery model will change from ours, I see it currently like maybe something like APIs like you were selling compute, um, it's an interesting

way that we need to figure out. Um, it's, it's very much different from how we are doing this today.

I think we will growing majority. We see this already in the last year, so I think, uh, probably 2 years ago we only maybe had like a 5 champions, maybe somewhere below in the organization in the books, with the understanding like how AI works. I think nowadays we see it, we have this across the board and, um, probably like 1 out of 10 we can consider someone who is really good foundational understanding of the technology.

And I really like also to see already today that a lot of people are addressing governance, and I think we would not talk about governance if we don't see value in the technology itself.

Um

and they are not too comfortable, so they also go with you and and and the entry comment, I think it's, it needs to be a priority also for every organization, and I hope we get this done until 2030, um, to have then our own proprietary models to have our own sovereignty of or whatever we call this air platform or something else. Um, and we find a good way like how humans

are maybe not anymore like that much in the loop, but orchestrating basically this technology, so that's how I see it moving from we had now the human and the loopf, we have still the human in the loop. And I think in the future it's more like this orchestrating of technology and then selling the technology to our clients, but

I don't have any fear we are disappearing.

Yeah, I mean, we are all the same in, in software development, uh.

a big change now in, in how talented developers are working.

They spend most of the time now architecting and code reviewing.

and then agents doing the coding.

and that's just a fact

Uh, with legacy software, it's a bit harder, but we're saying that, I mean, AI.

it's swear that's well, it's, it's kind of the worst one from here to the future. So it will become much better. Um, so

I think we'll see the same shift where, where

all of a sudden a construction worker or designer can have 7 or 10 PhD levels assistants.

performing work for them according to their instructions.

which means that any company can become 10x in what they can produce or do if they seize the opportunity. I think those will be the winners because I don't think we have capacity for 10x more output in construction, at least not yet until we start colonizing other planets, but I said that will take a few decades still maybe.

Maybe, maybe we can do another poll. Who in the audience believes that

based on the transformer architecture, so to call LLMs, we really reached PhD level intelligence by 2030. Who believes in that?

OK, it's

it's less. So let's do it next year again and let's see maybe if uh the sentiment also changes.

Yeah, no, I would say that the architectures, they are more advanced already, so, so I mean there are sometimes outperforming us, for example, on the, let's say there's like, uh, mathematics Olympia task that less than 1% of humanity would solve, right? But on the other hand, you sometimes have these conversations with the same model and they are like toddlers, right? So they actually make dumb decisions. And if you think about agentic AI, this is a

majority, this is a risk. This is a security leak in there because they are like a lot of like LLM's decisions that need to be made autonomously. So even if one or the other of these decisions are going to break because it's behaving like a toddler. Yeah, the whole outcome, you cannot use it. It's useless. So I'm still not 100% convinced if it's the current technology and just by adding more data and more compute, we are actually really reaching like this continuous learning this real, real creat

iv ity from the models, but also 100% like PhD level thinking, because yes, they are outperforming a lot, almost all of us, like in very specific tasks, but they are also failing on a variety of other tasks that even a 4 year old can likely solve, yeah.

Now, how do you see it? You come from uh other side of the Atlantic and uh things are moving maybe be a bit differently there. Yeah, so.

it's not easy to predict the future. I'm not like predicting the future. I wish I had that ball to predict it, but what I'm seeing by 2030 and it's already happening at least with the clients that I'm working with, I see more and more companies, uh, regardless of their size, they're getting more AI talents, and we've seen some of them during the presentation today that they're like, they had like two AI experts here joining their company. So more and more A

C companies will hire AI experts to partner with their domain experts to do the better work. Uh, that's one thing that would be more uh common. The other, uh, the second piece is Knowledge is being a democratized and um your clients, our clients may have access to that level of expertise that we have, but what's going to make us unique is our perspective, like what we know that they don't know what how we see the world. There

Bringing in and that perspective could

be like an addition to our service, like maybe it could be a consulting. Yes, uh selling hours won't work. Maybe we can sell our perspective itself based on what's not available, based on what GPTs cannot provide. And um

the third piece is we talked about LLMs and I show an example of LVM, large vision model, and there are some research that are happening in terms of large DNA models. They're trying to simulate our DNAs with the data that they have. And I think by 20,130, maybe the MVP version or maybe a good version of a large model for our industry, maybe large billing models, something that is connecting the whole

system together may come up because that's when we get the value. So if we're not just limited to large language model, it can go to like a different aspects as well.

The fourth one is not.

that optimistic one, but this is something that is uh not leaving me, and is we talked about data quality, data being scattered all over the place, and they call it data sprawl. One prediction that I have is like we get stuck in aging sprawl because building agencies getting simpler and simpler and our employees, they can build their own agents and eventually maybe next year or in 2 years one conversation here is like how we

manage data, where are the agents who owns these agents? is this agent is still accurate, like how we can evaluate them, and I think uh one challenge that we'll face in the future could be that uh agents, AI agents for all, and it's really good that we look back at data as well, the issue that we've been facing so far, learned from it, and see how we can have um better approach for building AI agents itself.

Now listening to everyone, I would like to make one edition. I think what we did not covered at all, but I think it's all super important. It's like the infrastructure question, right? Do we have enough energy to serve the grid for the systems that we are now describing of 10 A PhD level and then employed everywhere. Um, and maybe there, the strategist maybe or someone else is like a view on that. We have a huge reactor, like a little bit farther away, but there's endless amount of energy available, so

I'm not too worried about that. I see Lamos is moving to the moon the day that may help opening that there are also one other thing is that uh

um the Chinese are developing extremely efficient models because they don't have access to the GPUs. So they, they have to optimize for GPO hardware that's 10 years old, and we know how much things have evolved.

So we got some really efficient models from there. I'm not just saying that, hey, just go online and use those. Be careful out there, but they publish all their research, which means that we can then create a safe copy of that over here as well and that they can be 10 times more efficient energy efficient, uh, less compute needless compute, even around without a GPU so there's, there's a couple, couple of things happening, happening like the, the, I think energy, there's enough of that

available. It's more about just how we access it and, and, uh, and then also AI is becoming more and more efficient with the new models and the research happening.

that eventually we'll, I mean, we'll already have AI assisted research where models are improving.

models, that's maybe we go to the topic we're not going to cover this time. AGI, but that's another fun topic maybe for next year.

Yeah, we need another more panels, but if we start to wrap it wrap it up, then a bit equoia Capital is one of the largest and most

prominent uh venture capitalists from San Francisco, um

they predicted that the next 1 trillion company will be a software company masquerading as a service company.

And uh I wouldn't say that.

it couldn't be the other way. Service company masquerading as a software company or starting to develop their own software.

But the more get to the collaborative thing.

If we have startups as today here, if we have great academia, if we are large and some of the largest service companies here and we have the very prominent, uh, software vendors like Trimble, like

can we do this together? Like,

do we need to battle that's who takes what or

and we really somehow

during this year

and before 2030 make it happen.

What is your hypothesis that

I'll take a collaborative stance but I mean now we have the tools to make collaboration even easier, and I don't think we have many customers that are just single vendor using tools and then they have the data sprawl, they have the tools sprawl.

but uh I think AI agentic AI will help us bridge those gaps and make it easier for customers to work with their data.

And I, I mean, it, it depends on where you believe innovation will happen, right? If, if, uh, for instance, agents require a lot of systems to interoperate.

then it's a good case for

the engineering companies to, to be in the driving seat. If you believe that it will happen, for instance, in the

the design software

without any input, then, you know, engineering companies are, will not do as well.

But I don't know the answer

My guess is that it will require a bit of everything.

and happen on all levels

On a personal level, I'm a collaborative person, but I think in the business world and the way how we have designed, um, our mindset around being profitable, um, trying to be like the, the frontier and what we are doing.

I don't think it's a realistic outlook.

We have a few minutes' time. So is there any uh questions from audience?

So, I have a question. Um, we are talking about the energy, of course, and compute, which is of course related to each other. Um, so I was wondering, is it already in discussion in the board that uh compute should be part of the P&L. So the profit and loss, uh, and Idiopics because currently we have a few percent of software costs.

um

I think that there, those could double, maybe in the future.

Um, due to compute.

I can share something. Um, yeah, I think what, what's shifting slowly in our industry is that, uh, the tech department was often seen as the cost center.

and

you now see that the mind shift mindset is shifting towards that we can be like the enabler and if we are looking at our cost b block, we are seeing like our cloud consumption is just increasing year after year, maybe even months over months.

And this is the reality and I think it's going to continue.

So

it is there. It, it, it is on, on that topic because I mean they are making the financial statements at the end of the day.

So it's a, it's a present topic, but on the other hand,

maybe not directly to the question, um,

we always talked about the, the shifting markets. Now we're talking about data centers. I mean, it's also an opportunity now for us as these organizations like to design the data centers to design the infrastructure, right, so you're also getting again like more opportunities out of

AI's growth or AI trend, um, and I think that's the continuous process of the work or opportunities that we need to find, and I like what you said. Like we need to be very broad. We should not go all in on just like one thing at a time, so we didn't need to be very agile.

But, how about you? I, I agree. I mean, I don't really understand

what you mean about that it should be part of DoE because it probably already is part of the OPECs.

and, and it's

I, I don't think you can really separate it from

the rest of software cost. I mean, software cost is going up for everyone, and the software costs part of your

PNL is increasing

And, but, but at the same time, AI is becoming, or not AI just digital is becoming a more integrated port of our delivery. So it's also a

should be part of our revenue

But as that happens, of course, as you said, digital and AI becomes more strategic topic also for the CIO.

It's not just a cost item that they need to every year calculate how do we distribute this. They need to think about how do we uh create return on this increasing cost? How do we minimize it? Yeah, exactly, that, that, that, that shouldn't be the question anymore. But how do we enable it so we get the 10x out of our employees.

Yeah, let's go from the 10% to there is still one more question I think let's say he does the I jam on that one because I think it's really important, because you mentioned it as a, we, you have a baseline software cost that you already had, however much you spend with Trimble or Autodesk or whoever. What you've layered on top is a whole bunch of tokens from Claude or Anthropic, etc.

It kind of like throwing back, I was like, what was the real benefit of BIM 15 years ago. We just added a whole new service line to the business. Did it make more money? Did it improve the outcomes? If we look back at this in 2030,

are we just gonna be like, oh, we just hired a whole bunch of artificial intelligence engineers and machine learning engineers. We increased OPEs, we increased and then we justified it because we then increased the revenue of the business, to be honest, I've never heard anyone question the investment we do in

in tokens and so on. And, and it's still very limited. Yeah, but your revenue hasn't increased

at the multiple that you're spending on the tokens.

No, but I think the, if, if you look at the cost per account or whatever you want, you barely see the tokens that we spend. It hasn't changed very much because IT is very good at keeping the cost down. Right, right, the total cost.

Um

but I think everyone, even if it was, even if it did show up, and even if we had separated and show number one, this is the cost. It would be an investment we would be willing to take.

I don't think there is another option

Our, our CDO adoption is not an option, sorry, uh, I, I would say that if you look at ROI just by numbers, dollars, um, maybe we also should look at it in terms of the quality and the speed of the work if we partner with AI, get the job done in a higher quality and faster. That could justify

the cost to some extent. It doesn't mean that you're paying out of pocket and losing money, and the, the client's expectation is changing, so if they can go and do even the rendering of a building like in 2 minutes, even though it doesn't like look um reasonable to an architect if an architect, say, it takes me like 2 months, 3 months to do the work for you and the expectation is at different level and uh

AI replacing jobs is real and it's a concern, and this is something that is the conversation at the government level that they need to figure out how the future will be with AI like taking over some jobs. I also believe that some jobs may not

we were just interium role uh doing those jobs until technology catch up and now they are caught up with some of those works. It's like the elevator conductor that we had in the past running the elevator, but technology cut up. We don't see any elevator conductor in the elevator. If we see it, we think that this building is luxury or something is broken, but uh the point here is um AI is going to replace some jobs and companies may not add more headcount.

and that cost of paying employees will go toward those tokens, maybe a portion of it, not all of it. So there is like a balance will happen here like adding headcounts versus paying for tokens until we find that uh

balance between these two to do one very short analogy. Um, so unfortunately, we also don't have numbers or metrics, but one of my software development teams, they're using GitHub copilot, and I asked them after 3 months

Do you want to have free lunch every week, or do you want to continue with the license, and they want to continuously license, and that really speaks for myself that they get a true benefit from the software.

No wonder the board will see this, so it's not a real return on investment.

but otherwise they would have chosen immediately like the free lunch, and there were cross everyone in the team with junior or senior, they were happy with the license.

and they're not doing vibe coding

I would say that the, the tokens that's kind of the uh way to play that we need to do. Everybody needs to do. I'm looking at the the last comment here from the previous presentation. AI is already here. The winners will be the ones to learn how to use it. And, and I think that's just a fact. I don't think software company that is not using AI now will be around a few like next year or the year after, unless they have a really heavy mode somehow, but a stranglehold on the data or whatever, but

uh, most companies suffer, and I think we will see that in

all the other industries as well. Maybe software is kind of first, kind of ironically trying to replace software engineers, but actually we are starting to see that wait a minute, we actually need really good software engineers.

to then work with the AI to get the good results instead of the slop.

That indeed, and if nothing else, Simon just innovated a free lunch, which doesn't exist uh an AI can provide it, uh, for us, even, even better. But thanks a lot for all the questions you have, uh, put together here. We have everything from accountability, from competitive advantages in the next couple of years, AI governance and so forth. So keep on discussing the panel is now ending and day one is ending, but the discussion shall continue.

So please utilize the lobby after this if you're not leaving right away. There's a dinner happening for the ones who are joining and the program will continue tomorrow with uh multiple sessions, uh, keynotes, and, uh, yeah, a lot of networking and interactions. Thanks a lot for the day, first day of AI in AAZ thank our panelists also.

Thanks a lot

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The session "Impact of Agentic AI in AEC Value Chain," part of the AI in AEC 2026 event, brought together panelists Annina Peisa, Kalle Valkama, Sam Saatchi, Kim Nyberg, Sam Zolfagharian, and Simon Oster to discuss the transformative role of AI in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC). Panelists shared their varying levels of enthusiasm for AI, ranging from cautious optimism to high excitement, and highlighted proprietary tools like Sweco GPT and Arcadis GPT, which ensure secure data handling and governance. The pyramid of AI adoption was introduced, categorizing firms from reactive to strategic innovators, emphasizing the importance of data quality and governance in driving AI adoption.

Examples of AI-powered innovations, such as flood simulations, tendering, and groundwater calculations, showcased the technology's potential to enhance construction and maintenance processes. Predictions for advancements like large vision models, proprietary AI systems, and energy-efficient infrastructure were discussed as pivotal developments by 2030. The panel underscored the importance of agile workflows and cross-functional teams in reshaping AEC delivery models, while collaborative opportunities between startups, academia, and software vendors were deemed essential for progress.

Challenges such as disconnected data, outdated systems, and the risk of agent sprawl were highlighted, with AI seen as a tool to address client trust and expectations. The discussion also touched on balancing headcount with token costs and the role of AI in democratizing knowledge and enabling PhD-level assistance. Sequoia Capital's prediction about trillion-dollar companies underscored the transformative potential of AI, while GitHub Copilot was cited as a successful example of AI adoption, enhancing productivity across teams.

Despite concerns about energy consumption and job displacement, the panel remained optimistic about AI's ability to revolutionize the AEC industry. The session concluded with a call for collaboration across the value chain to ensure AI's benefits are fully realized, setting the stage for a future where AI drives efficiency, quality, and innovation in AEC.

Speakers

SO

Simon Oster

Global Director Data Science & AI

Arcadis

AP

Annina Peisa

-

RIL / Ramboll

KV

Kalle Valkama

-

Tyréns

KN

Kim Nyberg

Senior Technology Director

Trimble

SS

Sam Saatchi

Chief Strategy Office

Sweco

SZ

Sam Zolfagharian

Co-Founder & Strategic Advisor

YegaTech

================================================================================
SESSION 9: Session 6: Smart Buildings and Cities
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

Uh, we have the

smart buildings and cities truck. We have 3 very good presentations, uh, upcoming, uh, from there.

Um

just a few outlines regarding uh

I've been looking into this, uh, presentations today. Um, we're looking at, of course, a lot of sensory information, uh, a little bit of machine learning applied.

We see interesting things like graph rags being applied to with LLMs. I've been looking into. But that's a common field, there is, uh,

quite practical ways how to

uh interact with buildings, sensors, a little bit of a simulation and how to make uh

people feel better, of course, when utilizing the buildings, how to optimize certain things like um Hrack, um, energy consumption things.

I think

we'll uh start the presentation, um,

with the first speaker, Mohammed Sefi from the La Peranta University of Technology and

we will be talking about um

some

reinforcement learning topics, simulations.

So, welcome. Thank you.

but this one.

OK, uh, good morning everyone. Uh my name is Mehra Safi. I'm a PhD student and junior researcher from Department of Electrical Engineering from uh LUT University. And I'm working in laboratory of electricity market and power systems.

So our main activities are related to energy systems and distributed energy resources like demand response energy community, and they're related to other topics like uh uh distribution grid development, uh, rural electrification, power system operation, and applied optimization on any uh energy uh sector problem. We have been involved in multiple uh projects in national and international

levels, but right now we are uh doing uh

work and drive to uh Pro Sony to invest V4F and Cawings, which are funded from different organizations. So myself, mainly works, uh, I work on the home energy management system and building operation like here in DriveTix's project, uh, we have uh several pilots in the UK, Netherlands, and Budapest. This one is a screenshot from

the user interface for home energy management system in Budapest, set up. It is based on whole system platform and it received some input data from homeowners like the departure time and also the desired associate and then based on the forecasted home load and period production, it gives the optimal scheduling for the bidirectional charging of the electric vehicle.

But today, I will mainly, uh, uh, I will mainly focus on the Smart Ery project, which has already done a couple of months ago. It was a business Finland funded project and uh

the motivation behind it was that the buildings account for 40% of the total EU energy consumption, and also the increasing trend in PV panel production, uh, PV panel, uh, set up in homes, a rooftop panels, and also dynamic energy market pricing provides the possibility of getting uh efficiency for homeowners. So, but challenges behind this is the ulc

er tain ty between different parameters in the home, the complex environment in buildings to, uh, uh, create the optimization model for it and also the requirement for a real-time and

fast uh controller.

uh, because of that, we have chosen deep reinforcement learning as a groundbreaking artificial intelligence method, uh, which is a model free. It removes the need for, uh, the uh complex uh

modeling of the building. It handles the uncertainties and uh is a very fast and responsive method.

So, you can see that in 2023 duringforcement learning was the top chart in a

the Searched keywords in GitHub. It shows how it is, how is it uh uh popular between developers.

So yeah, this is the whole setup is it is a building equipped with energy storage system, PV panels, HVAC, which has a by-directional interaction with grid using the home energy management system.

So, you may notice the difference of presentation of the academic person with industry, so I, I have some formulations here, but I will, I will not go so deep. So we have the objective function, which is the minimization of the cost or maximization of the profits of this interactions with the grid. We have power balance constraints, Energy storage system constraints.

and the thermal comfort limitation which the temperature inside the building should be always between 20 and 24 degrees and also the constraints regarding the HVAC and building itself to a thermal dynamics of the building. And the whole optimization is for 24 hours and the resolution resolution of the optimization is one hour.

So, uh, for, uh for modeling the building, we use uh regression models as a machine learning method. Uh, we, uh, model the building with EvaC districting and other components using linear regression. For this, we performed a step response test in the uh in a commercial building in Lochte, which belongs to LSK Company, which is a technology company in Finland.

Uh, we had a different sensors there to uh measure temperature, CO2, and humidity inside the building. And the test was uh for 8 hours and 40 minutes at 10 minute intervals, and we toggle the power of HVAC from 75% to 40% at two times during the test.

And here the mathematics shows why it can be modeled using linear regression. You can see that the uh temperature change depends on the several factors, but all coefficients are linear, so we can easily model it using the linear regression and the chart shows an interesting thing that the uh correlation between the set back uh HVAC power and the uh airflow in the channels are

really near to 1, 0.99, which makes our life easier to do this linear regression.

So for a reinforcement learning unit, the Markov decision process formulations first with states we give the time stamp, the uh the energy uh price for current over and for the next 3 hours, the PV production, the state of the charge, the inside and outside temperature as the state which gives enough information to agent about the environment that it's uh it's, it wants to optimize. So, and you, you may know that

in Finland, we have 24 hours of energy price available so we can do this to give

3 future our prices to the agent to give some future insight.

for better optimization.

and further uh for better accuracy of the neural network we have, uh, it is better to normalize the states and also the actions that we have. These are the decision variables that agent will decide about it. They charging and discharging power of the energy storage system, the HVAC and also the interaction with the grid.

So we have reward function, uh, first time first term is uh similar to the objective function and other two terms are penalties for the conferred violation and also power balance constraint violation.

So this is the whole setup for the agent that we have. We have Actor Network, Critique Network Actor decides about the decision variables critic network criticized the decision based on the state that it has and give the value function for it and this is a soft actorcritic agent in reinforcement learning methods.

and this is an algorithm easily can be found in the literature for soft actor-critic algorithm.

And so before the results, we validate our regression. You can see that in the left side, uh, this is the, uh, HVAC step response test 2 times from 75% to 40%. And then on the right side you can see the results of the regression. You can see that the predicted values are following the actual values with reasonable accuracy, and the absolute error at the maximum which is 0.3, uh, using this simple regression model.

This, uh, uh, sorry, this uh uh regression can decrease the need for complex structure of the building like materials, all details about it. So this, this will increase the optimization uh decrease the optimization time significantly. And this shows uh the uh river during the train. You can see that in this start it was really small and after 4000 episodes, it's, it has

increased to around 1, and it is uh it is a normalized reward, so uh it is around 2000 cents per episode, I suppose.

And then after saving the best model during the training phase, we give the state and gets, get the action out of it. You can see in 4 different days, uh, in fall, spring and winter, we have red lines as energy market price, the blue uh bars as the

energy storage, charging and discharging and purple ones as great transactions. You can see that charging and discharging of the energy storage system completely follows the energy market pricing in cheap hours, for example, in top left, uh, chart, uh, at the beginning hours, the battery has charged and the grid, we have both energy from grid to charge the battery, and when the prices goes high

we sell this energy by discharging from battery and selling it to the greatest maximize our profit by participating in this transactions.

And this one shows the temperature profile, like you can see the red lines are uh for the uh indoor temperature, the blue lines dashed blue lines are for outdoor temperature. You can see uh that uh during every day

Each day we have maintained the temperature between 20 and 24 degrees. Even, for example, in uh the down uh left one, the

uh average temperature outside was negative and it was below even -10 and it was able to manage it at the edge of that comfort zone.

And these are some geometrics for each day, and one important thing from this we can see that uh in spring days we, when we have a son in Finland. We have few production which results in the top left subplot, a huge decrease in the energy cost. These values are in cent and for example, we have €14

per day of profit by uh by participating in this program. So imagine you're consuming energy and you get some profit out of it.

So, uh, yes, and uh this was the SAA implementation in energy management, uh, problem in smart homes.

and the results show a huge economic benefit by implementing this reinforcement learning agent and also because of blackbuck modeling of the building, we remote lots of hassles and complexities in modeling the building, the thermal dynamics.

and this one was an offline learning, which, uh, removes the disruption of the employees in a commercial building. So after that, when you install the controller, you can uh justify, uh, sorry, um,

adjust the weights and bias of the agent a little bit by online learning, and for future works, uh, we may collect more step response tests because it was only in one month, so it limited our work for warmer seasons, but for example, a couple of step response tests in summer, spring, and more warmer days, but uh increase the uh ability of this agent for controlling in different

outdoor temperatures

And thank you. Here's my contact and we're, uh, we're active in ascending proposals for different uh energy call uh uh fon calls in Horizon Europe, in Finland. So if you want to work uh and or have a partner in energy side, so our department and our laboratory would be a good.

choice. Thank you

Thank you very much. Uh, any questions from the audience at this time?

I have a couple uh uh couple here that I'm interested to to ask um.

Is there anything like moving this system to another building that you need to do any retraining work and other you mentioned a little bit from some online learning aspect, but how do you say, uh, being moved directly to another building, uh, OK, so, uh, it can be moved using uh transfer learning like some uh

pre-trained model and retraining uh using the new environmental building, but for generalization, you need to do a little bit more, maybe some step responses in the new building can make the training better, but generalization uh is many, maybe one of the hot topics right now in the literature that how we can generalize this, uh, agent that we have developed for all buildings. Well, transfer learning is one

of the potential methods for it.

Is it done with the sensors as well, they need to be very specific. Yeah, it needs a sensors inside the building and it needs to update its policy by receiving feedback from the censors in the new building that does its policy performs well or not, then it updates its weights and biases, and that's how it works.

Yeah

One more thing, was it like a 9 vector, uh, approach. I was thinking of some features that you had. Was there something that

uh

was really the most relevant ones regarding regarding the solution, uh, for use.

this one.

Yes, yeah, so which, which turned out to be the most relevant ones? Is it obvious?

uh, it depends actually. All of them are important because if you want to, uh, use battery unit to have information about the state of charge of battery. But uh to give enough information, I think the energy price uh Victor's, uh, played a huge difference when I gave 3 previews

future prices, it increased the performance really good. And also, the other information I think are necessary other than being beneficial because you need indoor temperature, outdoor temperature, and also, uh, but, uh, the current time step can be remote, but being there gives again more information to the agent, so.

I think, uh, 1st 5 elements were the most important for giving more information to the agent. Yeah. OK. Thank you for a good present. All right.

So, next we have something interesting from I hear Sinte. Am I correct? It's uh from Saint Trondham. OK, so, uh,

we have Knud Nordanger talking about a little bit going into Graphrack. Uh, it's also a very interesting topic for me to hear, uh, looking into this similar topics. So, well, thank you.

OK

Thank you. Um,

Good morning, everyone. Um

as, uh, Henry said, my name is Knut Noga. I come from the research institute Sinte.

Community in Norway

Uh, I'm a mathematician by trade, but now I'm doing applied research at the intersection of AI and the built environment.

And today, I want to talk about a fundamental shift in how we interact with our buildings.

And the key point I want you to remember

is that AI becomes much more useful for buildings when it's anchored in structured metadata.

And I'll show you how

Every building around us is generating enormous amounts of data.

Temperatures, airflows, CO2 levels, occupancy equipment states.

Yet

if you walk up to a building operator today and ask, why is my meeting room cold?

The answer usually involves

a lot of manual digging.

either by navigating complex dashboards.

or

or even um

uh visiting the room

So the question we we're asking is, can we make buildings conversational.

Can natural language become the primary interface, not just a nice to have front end, but the actual way people interact with building data, day to day.

To achieve this

we need

to have

we need to be grounded in actual real data.

We need

um, to be contextual.

to our specific buildings, and we need our results to be explainable.

so that we can trust them, and we need the results to be actionable, so we can do things with them.

Um, this is really the ball. A nice looking chatbot is not enough.

In buildings

we need to have trust and traceability.

so that we can act on the results.

And if it were easy, we, we would have done it a long time ago.

And as you know

the uh the reality is that building data is fragmented across incompatible systems.

We have thousands of data points with inconsistent naming, locked inside a technical interfaces.

And critically, the data lacks semantic structure. That means

An alalam can't just read it and reason about it reliably.

Without grounding

you may get fluent, convincing answers.

but not reliable building intelligence.

That's the core problem we set out to solve, not only making data accessible, but also making the meaning of data explicit.

So our answer to this challenge is an, is an architecture built on 3 layers working together. Firstly, we have our semantic layer.

structured metadata that describes what exists in the building, which spaces

which devices, which quantities they measure and how they relate to each other.

This semantic layer can be grounded in established ontologies, such as Brick. Second, the live data layer, real time and historical time series data from census.

This is the raw signal from the building.

And third, the reasoning layer. This is where the LA Las come in.

But crucially, the other lab doesn't operate on raw data explicitly.

Every query, every answer, every interpretation is anchored in the semantic layer. The structure metadata is the ground truth.

that prevents our model from going off script.

And just for the record, we're not working with toy examples. Our test bid is our Zeb laboratory.

um, which is the zero emission building.

at and the new incentives campus in Trondheim, Norway. And it's an active office building where I have my office. You have real occupants

real operations

It has over 1500 censor, 150 controllable objects.

and generates around 17,000 data points.

So it's a high-tech building, and this is where we deploy, test, and iterate.

So having this real living building as a test bed.

means that we have firsthand access to messy real world data and can, can experiment with that.

as we wish

OK, let's dig a bit into the details.

Here we see a familiar familiar situation.

Uh, metadata are often available in tableau form. This is an extract from a time series database, which feels like system component floor, room point, and of course the value we are interested in.

Humans can often read this.

and understand roughly but what it means.

However, the machine cannot really interpret the relationships.

It does not know what contains what, what a point actually measures or how one column relates to another in a meaningful domain model.

So this kind of structure, flat structure, is readable.

but not genuinely machine interpretable.

Here's the same data, the same building, the same census, but now structured as a knowledge graph.

Now we have explicit machine readable relationships.

Room 3312 is on floor 3. It has contains a component RT 601, which measures room temperature. The data hasn't changed. The structure has.

and this structural shift is everything.

A graph at the base cannot answer questions like which senses are in room 3, 12. What does uh RT 601 measure.

with zero ambiguity.

And just for the records, here's our first show the value of this explicit semantic structure in itself.

Uh, and the next step, uh, formal ontologies like brick can further standardize and strengthen this model.

OK, let's move to some examples. Um,

this is one of our first prototypes developed a couple of years ago when, um, chatbots were the answer to everything. Uh, but still, uh still useful. It underpins my, my main point. This is a chatbot that lets use the query live building data in plain language.

There's no query language. There's no dashboard navigation, just a question.

So you can ask structural questions. What senses are in in room 312 and get a direct, accurate answer.

You can ask for live data. Show me the CO2 levels for the past hour.

And you can even request data exports.

So the most important point here is that it does not jump directly from user question to final answer.

Instead, it first insolves the intent in the knowledge graph.

And then it generates the relevant time series query.

So the graph is doing real work here. It's not just decoration. And importantly,

the LLM never knows what the temperature is.

It knows how to ask the database for it.

So this distinction is what gives us reliability and traceability.

Just, just let me quickly walk you through what actually happens when a user types a question, in 4 steps.

Of course, you type your question, what is the room temperature?

Then we do a hybrid search.

um, mapping or finding out the room temperature, how that maps to the canonical ontology label, room temperature.

The knowledge graph, then we get a confirmation that this same sensor actually exists in the room, and if it turns the system and point identifiers.

Uh

and then the system generates a flux query to influx to the query influx TB which we use as a time series database and retrieves the live value.

The yellow lamp's role here

is to orchestrate these steps and presents and present the result in a human-friendly way.

Not to guess or hallucinate the answer.

So every step is observable.

And just to elaborate on that, one of the biggest practical challenges in building chatbots is that people say the same thing in different ways. What is the outside temperature? Show me outdoor temp

external air temperature.

These are all the same query, but a naive keyword search would struggle.

So our system, uh, layers 3 mechanisms to handle this. We have the ontology that defines the canonical concept, which is outside temperature. We have a graph that stores human readable labels and aliases.

and

for anything the label index misses, we have a hybrid search to find the closest ontology concept. So all three paths converged on the same

canonical identifier, outdoor temperature.

which is then used to look up the actual sensor.

So the user gets the right answer regardless of how they asked.

A few words on scaling because getting the semantic graph in the first place is a real barrier to adoption adoption.

So traditional manualtology mapping requires a specialists, takes weeks, and produces error-prone, hard to maintain results.

So this shift

from higher, higher an ontology expert to a building engineer with a spreadsheet spending a few hours. It's, is the major thing. So the output here is a validated consistent and regenerable.

The domain experts describe what they know and the system handles the rest.

Um

I will only touch briefly on this, but we use ultrareasonable ontology templates to solve this.

uh, so that we have predefined templates that's of course a manual work, but that domain experts can use, uh, with that understanding and knowledge of the building, so that we

save a lot on, on, on a lot of time on, uh, getting these validated knowledge graph.

OK, so the graph is built. What can we do with it?

except for answering questions, which brings us to a prototype number 2, which goes beyond answering questions. It moves from talking to buildings to interpreting them.

In a traditional model, uh, a building management system sends an alarm. Room 312, temperature low. The operator sees this.

doesn't know why, and has to manually investigate.

This takes time, wastes effort, and often leads to wrong conclusions.

So our digital janitor runs continuously

monitoring all sensors in a room simultaneously.

When it detects an anomaly, it doesn't just flag it. It reasons about why.

It correlates the temperature reading

with the window sensor, the heating set point, the outdoor temperature, and produces a diagnosis.

Uh, the room is cold. The window, the car windows is open and you should close the window. This is a very simple example.

but the key mechanism here is that the LLM reasons like across c senses using the anthology as a map.

It knows which senses are relevant to explain a temperature anomaly because the graph encodes these relationships.

So what makes this different from a simple threshold alarm is that the reasoning is context aware. It knows the room, its senses, and what normal looks like for this specific space.

Just showing the internal logic uh quickly here. We combined the rheumatology, the structured room data

and time series with the user defined reasoning conditions, essentially a prompt.

And this is sent into an LLM-based reasoning step.

The key message is, again, that the LLM is not reasoning in vacuum. It is constrained by room, context and by sensed evidence.

showing a few examples. This is a dashboard for normal operation for room 3 as well.

All 15 sensors reporting normally. You have zero active anomalies. I noticed that the panel on the right, not just raw numbers

um, each, each sensor reading comes with a natural language interpretation.

But more interesting, interestingly, what, what happens when something is wrong? Let us introduce an anomaly.

It's an early morning, the temperature is 10 degrees C.

A traditional alarm would say temperature low. The operator sees it. It doesn't know if it's a broken heating valve, a scheduling issue or something else entirely.

Our system produces something fundamentally different.

The detect the detected anomaly panel.

As you can see, it reads that the room temperature is significantly lower than the heating set point of 21 degrees. This discrepancy is explained by the window being fully open as indicated by the Windows status sensor.

And this, and this is the key. It suggests a specific action. Close the window to prevent heat loss and ensure the heating system can't maintain the desired temperature.

So the operator

does not need to start a manual investigation. Do they do not have to go to the 3rd floor to discover the cause. The building has already explained why the room is cold.

So let me close, uh, with where we are and where we're going.

We have demonstrated two of the three capabilities shown here. Talk

natural language, language queries.

uh, against live building data. We've done this and it's working.

Interpret

LLM-based anomaly detection with causal reasoning. You have done it in our lab. ACT, automated execution of suggested intervention. Uh, we are working on that, uh, ongoing work. It will be presented at a different conference later this year or before the summer.

But two takeaways, uh, for you today. First, observable retrieval matters.

Answers are grounded in graph lookups and database queries, not free floating LLM output.

Secondly

interpretation beats dashboards. The goal isn't more data, it's understanding.

When buildings can explain themselves, operators make better decisions faster.

That's the shift we're after. So in conclusion, the conclusion I keep coming back to. Ontologists aren't just data, aren't just a data engineering concern.

They're the foundation

that allows AI to move from chatting about documents

to actually managing real buildings.

Thank you.

Thank you for the presentation. There are questions from the audience side. I have one here in the system, uh, I'm gonna start with this. So, do you collect data from the actual occupants building users, not building managers.

and feedback on the comfort satisfaction, interaction with heating controls, opening windows, etc. Issues linked to human behavior change.

Yeah, that's something we would like to do. We don't have that system in place today for occupant feedback, but, uh, other things we are looking into. We actually have one project on that that will investigate both from a technical perspective, but also from

a more human ethical, uh, perspective.

Yeah. Somewhere from the oldest there.

Yeah, thank you for the presentation. It was very interesting. Um, I was wondering if you, you explained it yet this one building if you also tried with different data from different buildings, it might be differently structured or something.

Yeah, so far we've tried this in, in our building, and

actually scaling this to, to different building is an ongoing research area with us. That's definitely a hot topic, yes.

Hi, thanks for the presentation, really interesting and as a whole, automation engineer myself, it's, it's nice to see this being researched. Um, in your research, did you find out like, uh, come up with some potential new sensors or automations actually kind of so that they could let's say that the window is open, that would, what would be the

cost benefit of maybe having them close automatically, uh, so instead of having, if it's open all night, that what is then the, what is then the kind of loss of energy. So what, what is kind of optimization point where it makes sense to start automating actors.

in the system

That's absolutely questions basically.

So two questions like other sensors that you don't have now but what might make sense, like occupation syllables in in in different rooms. Maybe you have that already, and then kind of what kind of active measures a building could have in the future.

Oh well, yes, we're always looking at expanding and expanding this, um, our current focus is actually taking it from our recommendation to

to doing, to implementing the

the recommendation automatically from a technical perspective.

Um

but, um,

yeah, as you said, there are, we don't have

that kind of optimization perspective on that yet, but that's, I think that's a natural extension as well.

I have one more question regarding the LM layer. Have you considered adding like a feedback loop from, uh, from the human that the correctness of the result would become a bit more deterministic in some cases.

It's on our list, I can say, yeah, but we haven't done it, but we, yeah, we were very much like to take us to that direction as well. Yeah, it's an interesting topic. Yeah. All right, thank you for the great presentation.

And then, moving on to the

final presentation.

of, uh, this session.

We have, uh, Babak Esani.

Welcome

We are going about optimization and uh buildings.

and I, if I understand correctly, we're looking a little bit how to think of optimizing spaces. just on how, how people are interacting in them, right?

All right

That's fine. OK

Good morning everyone and thank you for being here. My name is Babake Hassani, and I am a PhD researcher in Istanbul Ein University in Turkey, and today I will present my research title Data to even Special Optimization, Smart building using digital to feedback loops and AI simulation.

This research explore how digital technology and artificial intelligence can help building adopt to constantly changing needs of their occupants. In particular, the study investigates how digital twin systems combined with AI simulation can support dynamic spatial optimization inside the smart buildings.

To begin, I would like to highlight a fundamental paradox in architecture. Most buildings are designed to last for 40 to 50 years. However, the way we actually used this building changed much more quickly.

Work pattern, organizational structure, collaboration style, and even technological tools evolve every few years. As a result, a space that we're optimized during the design age often become inefficient or uncomfortable over time.

In other words, we design building as a static object, but human activity inside them are highly dynamic.

When problems emerge, and we usually attribute them to mechanical systems such as HA, uh, performance or lightning condition.

However, in many cases or many scenarios, and the real issue is not the building uh system themselves, but rather than a special configuration of the environment.

Here this raises an important question How can building become more responsive to changing human needs.

This question formed the starting point of this research. The objective of the study is to explore how building uh evolved from a static container into adaptive environments.

In instead of treating a special design as a one-time decision made during the design phase, we proposed a system where a special configuration can be continuously evaluated and improved throughout the building life cycle.

To achieve this, the research introduced a framework that integrates two emerging technology.

digital twin system and generative artificial intelligence. The key idea is the close this loop, feedback loop between the real world building data and computional spatial optimization.

Let us now look at the proposed framework.

The architecture of the system is organized into 3 interconnected layer. The first layer is a physical layer and this layer represent the actual building environments, including IoT sensors, installed throughout the whole building.

These sensors collect the real-time data about environmental and behavioral conditions such as occupancy level, uh, acoustic condition and also thermal comfort. And the second layer is digital tin. digital to act as a real-time virtual representing of the building. It continuously receive and process data from the physical environment and update digital model accordingly.

In other words, it functioned as a dynamic mirror of the building.

The third layer is AI agent, which acts as an analytical and decision making component of the system.

within this layer, we apply deep reinforcement learning techniques to simulate potential spatial change and evaluate their performance.

Throughout this architecture, the system becomes capable of analyzing spatial conditions and exploring alternative configuration confusionally.

A core innovation of the proposed framework is lies in what we call digital digital twin.

and feedback loops. In many current implement, digital training system function primarily as a just like monitoring dashboard.

A visualize environmental data, but they do not actively participate in decision making.

In contrast, our framework transfer the digital twin into active optimizing system.

The AI agent continuously evaluated a special condition and task a simple but powerful question.

What would happen if the special layout were adjusted.

To answer this question, and the system runs thousands of simulations within digital environments, different spatial scenarios are tested, including variation in furniture arrangement, zoning the strategy and circulation pattern.

Because all these experiments occur uh inside the digital model.

they can perform without disrupting the real building environment and through this

iterative simulation process, the system can identify configuration that improve both environmental performance and occupant comfort.

From a technical perspective, the framework bridged the gap between the building information modeling and artificial intelligence. The geometry and the special structure of the building is is represented using BIM model created in a rabbit, which provides a static geometry and a special relationship required for simulation. Python is scripting is used to manage the data pipeline integrated sensory information and control the s

im ul ation process. The system is deployed on a cloud-based infrastructure using Microsoft Azure, which enable real-time data ingestion escapable storage and continuous integration of IoT sensors, a stream within the digital twin environment.

Finally, the machine learning component is implemented using tensor flow where reinforcement learning agencies trained to evaluate and optimize a spatial configuration. Together, these tech technology create an inter workflow is beach building data, a special model, and I, I algorithm operate within a unified confusional environments.

Before applying uh AI simulation, it's important to understand what type of data drive the system. The simulation model relies on a multiple data source. These include occupancy pattern, environmental condition, a special contrast and behavioral usage data. Together these data sets allow the system to replicate the real operation conditional inside the building. This data-driven foundation enabled the AI agent to evaluate a special perform

ance more accurately

At this point, the important question arise is AI-based special optimization actually feasible in real architectural practices. To explore this question, we can examine one of the most influential industry example in this field. The project is Autodesk Mars's office in Toronto.

In this project, Autodesk applied generative design techniques to optimize a special layout of their office environment. As you watch these short videos, notice how design process is treated not simply as a drawing plan, but a solving a computional optimizing problem. In this project, Ardes collected detailed information from approximately 250 employees and they collected data, including several types of spatial preference

for example, adjustments in relationships and identify which team needs collaborative for collaborate frequently and they also called uh collected information about acoustic preference and distinguishing between employees who required a question environment and those working in a collaborative settings. Additionally, daylight access and environmental comfort preference for included in a dataset. All these

parameters were translated into Comfucional constraint and objective.

Using the parameter and the generative design produced approximately 10,000 different spatial configuration. Each configuration was evaluated against multiple preference sectaria. The algorithm had to balance competing goals such as special density, access to daylight, privacy requirements, and collaborative proximity. These process demonstrates how artificial intelligence can explore uh design space for

larger what it typically possible through a manual design iteration. The result is a set of optimized spatial layouts generated through computional exploration. However, these optimization happened before the building was actually used.

However, this example also revealed an important limitation, the optimization process in Autodesk project occurred only once before the office was built. After construction, the special layouts remained relatively fixed and our research proposed the next step in this evolution. In a set of performing the spatial optimization only during the design files, we propose a system capable of continuous optimization throughout the

building life cycle and by by integrating digital twin and AI simulation, the system can repeatedly evaluate a spatial condition as a organizational pattern evolved.

This enabled building to respond to change in occupancy, work pattern, and environmental condition over time.

Simulation result and

to test feasibility of this approach, we conducted a predictive simulator based on a typical open plan floor office. Within the simulation environment, uh, the AI agent evaluate multiple spatial configuration while considering environmental conditions and occupant dis distribution based on simulated 3 months evaluation period in a controlled digital tin environment. The results suggested several

potential improvements compared to the baseline configuration. The results indicate notable improvement in energy performance and occupant comfort. This improvement was primarily associated with the optimizing spatial density in relation to daylight availability. Although these results are based on the simulation, they suggest that spatial optimization can significantly, significantly influence both environmental performance

and user satisfaction

Definitive promising result, several challenges remain. One of the most important issue concern about humanity, human agency.

Uh, if an algorithm if an algorithm suggests moving furniture or reorganizing the spatial zone, how much control should occupants have over these decisions. Our finding indicate that the system should not operate as a fully automated mechanism. In a set, it should function as a decision support system for facility manager and designers. In this model, the AI provides recommend

ation and analytical insight while human stakeholder retain final decision-making authority.

To conclude the future of this smart building may not depend solely on improving mechanical systems or energy technology equally important if ability of the building to adopt specialty to human needs by integrating digital twin feedback loops with AI-driven simulation, we can move toward the new generation of built environments

uh, that's continuously learned from data and evolve over time. Such adaptive environments have a potential to improve energy efficiency, special performance, and occupants well-being simultaneously. To wrap up, we believe that the true intelligence of the smart buildings lies on, lies not just in a sensors, but its ability to adopt the people inside. Thank you very much for your time and attention

Thank you very much.

See you. Any questions starting from the audience?

I'll start with a few, uh, very interesting, uh, outcomes there. I'd be interested, first of all, did you find during this um research, some common common things that what are like the lowest hanging fruits when you see from the data that would improve, uh, the well-being of people in the spaces.

Of course, you know, because uh this is a silver in a research phase and we are working on it, but uh we are mostly now working to implement the framework of the system. And later we will go into detail and yeah, and I, I think

uh

in

yeah, of course.

Something uh

what side?

Um.

from

from use case, this is definitely for the facility managers, right? Or have you considered other, other like um use cases or scenarios with similar assimulations would be useful. Um, you know, this is definitely for the facility manager and maybe architecture because this system is producing and suggesting the layout and the layout the, the, the optimized layout and the facility manager

can follow it or architect can use that for further optimizing the spatial yeah.

afterbu, yeah

What would be

like an entry level if you want to install sensors? What's the minimal things you would need to perform any successful simulation in your opinion.

Of course this is the, the, you know, as I told you, it is a simulated base, uh, and the sensor will be in a whole building. It will, it should inSL in a whole building and because this is the real-time feedback. It is uh based on real-time feedback. So the D sensor must be uh very accurate and regarding that, the system work in a feedback loop.

Yeah.

All right. There's uh one question in

on there

Good morning. Uh thank you for the presentation. Maybe two small questions. One throwing a line towards the presentation just before you. Have you used certain ontologies to structure your information uh relate to your architecture, and a second, how, because you use different sources, of course, how uh labor or manual intensive was the uh inputs of all the different sources. Actually there's

very interesting to that question. You know, the, this is a simulation base and all that, it's already simulated. So, uh,

hm within the control digitality environment, you can get this data and based on those simulated, the outcome will be, become more clear.

Thank you. You're welcome.

OK

I think we're around the end of our session. So, just a more applause to

Thank you

And I think

next up we have a few minutes. We're starting, uh, I think with some uh, coffee, and exhibition time, uh, out. So I'm gonna start in a few minutes and

then uh waiting for the next sessions later on. Thank you for your time

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "Smart Buildings and Cities" session at AI in AEC 2026 showcased groundbreaking advancements in AI-driven building optimization, moderated by Henri Pitkänen. Mohammad Seyfi from LUT University presented his work on reinforcement learning in energy management systems, emphasizing the DriveTwix project and Budapest setup powered by Home Assistant platforms. He highlighted the use of Soft Actor-Critic algorithms to optimize energy consumption and thermal comfort, leveraging energy market pricing, step response tests, and linear regression for building modeling. Babak Ehsani from Istanbul Technical University introduced a digital twin framework, integrating Microsoft Azure and TensorFlow for continuous spatial optimization. His research proposed adaptive environments that evolve with occupant needs, referencing Autodesk's Mars Office project, which utilized occupancy patterns and adjacency relationships for generative design. Knut Nordanger from Sintef Community demonstrated a semantic architecture for conversational AI in buildings, grounded in Brick ontology and knowledge graphs. His work at the ZEB Laboratory showcased anomaly detection using sensors like CO2 levels and window status, with actionable recommendations generated via hybrid search and Flux queries. The session underscored AI's transformative role in creating responsive, efficient, and occupant-centric built environments, bridging the gap between static design and dynamic human activity.

Speakers

BE

Babak Ehsani

-

Istanbul Aydin University

HP

Henri Pitkänen

-

Trimble

KN

Knut Nordanger

-

SINTEF Community

MS

Mohammad Seyfi

-

LUT University

================================================================================
SESSION 10: Session 7: Climate Technology
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

I am from Texas A&M or Prairie View&M. It's part of the Texas A&M system. Uh, today I'll be presenting a, a eugenic AI workflow uh for urban heat island analysis. Uh, so in this workflow, let's first talk about the urban heat island challenge. Uh, about 68% of the world's population will live in cities by 2050.

Urban heat island increases temperature 1 to 10 °C degrees and it's not about comfort anymore, it's about, uh, driving energy consumption and building up in the grading air quality.

Um

The good news is we have a lot of data nowadays, so we have about 1200 satellite images taking daily.

uh, worldwide. Let's OK.

OK

Hello, is it better? OK.

So, should I repeat or you're all good? I think it's all good. OK, perfect.

Um,

I lost my

uh to click it. Uh, however, urban heat island analysis is manual work, a lot of manual work. It's cumbersome. Uh, it is fragmented, lots of tools and lots of steps in the way, so it's really difficult to do that uh in an automated manner.

additionally, interpretation of urban heat analysis requires main domain expertise and technical knowledge. I finally, there is no end to end automated analysis that I've known that I have known so far.

Uh, research objectives here, uh, by the way, I work in academia, so I say research, but I know that half of this conferences from industry.

but I do a lot more research work. Uh, so here the research objective is to design a multi agent AI workflow for Urban Heat analysis, and the ministrate capabilities to case study. In this case it's Houston, Texas.

and evaluate NDVI for vegetation coverage and DBI for built up coverage correlation with the land surface temperature.

and then finally, uh oh not finally uh also use AI-driven analysis, uh, computer vision recognition, cloud AI, uh, vision in the cloud, the large language models.

Uh, and then, um, assess the ski scalability for multi-city.

Uh, so, uh, I have some videos to show you the dashboard that is the front end for the user to use for urban heat island analysis. In the back end, it's a multi-agent workflow that is uh working in the background. So I took some videos of the dashboard, and I apologize in advance these videos are going really quick because these videos are limited in size, uh

because we had size limitation to upload the presentation, so I made the videos go a little bit quick, so be at Al narrate the videos and I'll talk while the videos are going on. So I apologize if I talk quickly. So I'm gonna start the video. So this is the dashboard that you that the user uses to analyze urban heat island. Uh, here I designed it to choose either a single city or multi-city. The slide though that I was doing is for cloud coverage to grabs

ate ll ite images from Google, and then the second dropdown menu. So this is the first job down when you chooses like one city or multi-city. I designed this dashboard to have 5 cities, but we can have all the cities in the world if we want to, and this, and then at the end,

then I hit run at the end. I know it's, it's fast video so I cannot really match up the speed.

Uh, so this is the dashboard in general, and you can see on the left side there's a couple of options and I'm going to go through, uh, but this is the design of the dashboard.

Uh, the pipeline in the background has multi-agents, or multi-steps. So the first agent, AI agent, acquires uh the satellite images from Google, uh, based on our specifications like cloud coverage, uh, time of the year, um, um resolution, all these things.

Uh, and then the second ag 3 processes the images, so it's, it starts looking at the composite images in terms of vegetation coverage, land surface temperatures, and all these things.

And then the segmentation process, which takes about 15 minutes to half an hour. It depends on how large the city is, uh, in the segmentation, the AI, this is a computer vision process. So the AI vision starts to recognizing each segment based on urban features. Uh, so for example, starts looking at the map and say, OK, this, this part of the map looks like

a residential part and then moves to the next part and says, OK, this is more like a highway, so it starts segmenting the map into different pieces based on urban features.

And then Thaiing basically is turning these segments into a little bit of tiles, so we can look at individual trials rather than looking at the whole large city like Houston.

Uh, and then finally aggregating all the reports for cities kill and then exporting all the results.

And you can see in the bottom of the screen, there's a lot of key technologies like Google Earth images, satellite images, uh, and of course Python and flask for the dashboard and in the background would be AI vision and LLMs.

Uh, this is the dashboard again. I'm going back to the dust board to show you when I hit run pipeline. Uh, you can see the process going on. Uh, so the first again, first thing is acquiring the images and you can see the log going on.

and then preprocess segmentation takes 15 to 20 minutes, but piling takes about 2 to 2.5 hours, but the whole pipeline takes about 3 hours. Uh, so you can analyze an entire city like Houston in 3 hours just like, you know, you can go grab lunch, come back, and the whole thing is automated for you.

And I see this as a great tool not just for people who have great expertise like urban planners, but also as a teaching tool for students, so I see this as a huge advantage because they can sit down, look at all these little tiles, understand more about the process rather than fiddling go ahead downloading images, creating analysis from scratch fiddling with code for segmentation. This

is very difficult process.

and then

I don't know if that's another video.

Oh yeah, uh once you're done, you can see some of the results. So in this video I'm showing quick results. You can see the layers, land surface temperatures. You have the segments, then the tiles we end up with 6000 tiles for a city like Houston. I'm going to talk faster because the videos faster, so the tiles you can see tile by tile analysis. Each tile has the lens surface temperature, location and map statistics in terms of temperature and then analysis by

AI. So if you read these, this is analyzed by AI allows learning to model, say, OK, this is, this looks like a residential area with not a lot of vegetation, and that's what they're driving the heat up, and you can ask follow up questions. So like in this video I'm asking something like, why this vision is so hot. What's making um did he go up and it starts giving you recommendations and suggestion and answering your questions so you can even follow up on the analysis that

is produced by AI and here are the statistics that you get automatically. You can get more documentations, analysis, uh, these are the distribution of pixels, uh, along the axis of temperature and amount of pixels, uh, and you can see here more results.

The video is a little bit faster. I apologize. Uh, this is, you, you can see these little boxes. This is a quadrant of Houston, so 4 by 4 grid, each grid has its own analysis and mean temperature, all these things. And then finally this is the city's kill port. You get the hottest visions, the coldest regions, and then the links on the bottom were files to download. Finally, you can ask Large language models about the entire process if you have a

specific question, if you need more, um, uh, uh, you know, specific, uh, maybe you want to see where temperature goes in a specific tile as well, so you can say, OK, I want a lifestyle 300 or tiled 250, the number of the title, could you tell me what's the difference between these two tiles? Why one of them is very hot on one of them is a little bit colder, so you can

you know, get all this type of analysis in the dashboard.

Uh, so, OK.

I think next time it will be helpful if you can increase the size of the PowerPoint. It so it can add the videos, bigger videos, or not sped up videos like this. But anyway,

uh so this is the tile analysis. You get uh the land cover classification, so it tells you if it's a residential, commercial, uh, maybe a park, a highway, uh, industrial, all these things, and it gives you also intensity assessment and I also generates what primary heat drivers are in each style. So for example, a tile like industrial area without any vegetation. I will tell you this is

an industrial area. There is no uloos, no visitation, and it's intense and there's a lot of build up places there that makes the heat, that drives the heat up, and it gives you as well specific medication recommendation.

Uh, this was a simple recommendations, so it gives you the recommendation like Kooloo youkuloof or maybe permeable pavement in Parkinson's and so on.

Uh, and then you get also comprehensive at the end of this process, you get comprehensive reports that I'm going to show you some. Again, I might go a little bit fast cause I have a lot of slides, uh, coming up, so I'll go fast on some of them. Uh, so AI produces some visualizations for you, statistics, reports and data. This is a list of all these things. The data comes back raw details, so if you want to take them to another software

for more analysis, like pixel temperature of pixel is also available as a web data.

Uh, so the study area is Houston again, it's the first largest city in the United States, uh, super, super large, I think it's, I did not calculate, but if you look at the map of Finland, maybe it's half of Finland, so it's really low city. I lived there, um, and then it's a hot and humid place as well. Uh, in the, it's urbanizing really fast like I wake up in the morning and there's a new building

in the neighborhood, so I don't know how they do that, uh, but it's, it's expanding in a crazy way, uh, and the limited canopy covers there as well as the um

uh vegetation, not a lot of vegetation because it's intense city in some places. And let me skip through some of these things. So these are the reports and the visualizations that you get after you're running this process. Uh, you get some statistics. I'm gonna go a little bit quicker.

Uh, you get the temperature distribution and you can see it's normally distributed around the 33 °C degrees.

degrees Celsius

and then I get the maps for the vegetation density and the buildup intensity.

Uh, this is very interesting graph does not look interesting, but the, the data that these two graphs still are interesting. Uh, so the one on the left, the one on the left, uh, is the vegetation coverage correlation with the land surface temperature, and you can see the slope there is positive. I'm sorry, negative, telling you that increasing the vegetation decreased temperature, and this is common sense,

right? But what's interesting is the graph on the right, that's the buildup area, uh, in relationship with the land surface temperature, and you can see the slope is positive and it's 7 times more dramatic than the slope on the left. So meaning that building up

in Houston affects temperature intensity 7 more times than vegetation than the effect of vegetation.

So it's really interesting to see that as analysis here in uh.

after the

the workflows done. This is the 4x4 grid quadrant in each quadrant you might not see it very well on this map, but there are lines, and each line has its own, there's a grid 4x4 grid on the map, and you can see each grid has its own analysis, statistical analysis with the mean temperature, hottest and coolest and all, all the things on the right are produced for each grid box.

and then you can get some hot and cold pixel distributions again, uh, the one in the middle is shows the temperature is normally distributed across Houston around the 33 °C.

Uh, the, these are the key findings. I'm not going to go over them for the sake of time, but conclusions.

um

so this is the first fully automated uh tool. If it's not precise, it might not be super precise cause it's ran by

and La language models, so it gives you some expertise, but I see this as a great teaching tool. I'm a professor and I teach students. This is great to see immediately results on urban heat island effect, uh, in a simple way for the non-technical user, non non-expert user. This tool has some um disadvantages. So it might, uh, first of all, it takes a little bit, like 3 hours

for Houston is OK, but if you want to start doing the batch multi-city, it might take days, so it's not super fast like you imagined, but at the same time it's great tool for quickly analyzing a tile by tile in a city.

and the, it produces a lot of analytical, uh, visualizations and reports in a matter of 3 hours per city, which is great.

Uh, also clouded vision, bring the bridges the gap between measurements and planning conditions because it gives you a commendation and this is the part that is ran by AI laws. I'm not very, and I'm standing here seeing this. It's weird, but I'm not, I don't like to have recommendation from my love's language model, if I'm an urban planner. I'm an architect, but if I'm an urban planner, I don't want to take recommendations from Malamas, but again, it could be a great quick tool to to get some

recommendations uh for people like students who start learning the process. Um, I think that's it.

Hopefully, I don't know this button clicks, yeah, so future work, uh, I'm out of time, but future work will be multi-temporal analysis because the analysis I'm using here is only for the summer, so it could be for summer and winter and spring and different seasons, also using higher resolution images, and the multi-city comparative studies. All right. Uh thank you

OK and for the start, sorry Rania, I made a mistake in the early beginning because we already had 5 minutes left. I rushed you into the states, but the good thing is that now we have 5 minutes for questions. So sorry about that.

Uh, what do you think on the questions on the audience? We have one in the tablet, but I want to know first. So thank you for that great presentation, super interesting, but how, as you said, that it takes 3 hours with AI and this tool. How how long would it take without AI?

How I'm sorry the Houston map like do that manually. Oh, without the map. Oh, that requires a lot of technical uh because uh first of all you need to understand like math li library, which is a little bit cumbersome for people to, you know, um, master, uh, I have to do some Python programming and some computer vision analysis, so it's a little bit technical, but with this workflow, you just hit

run, you click out Houston or Austin, whatever city you want to try, and then you hit run, so everything is run in the background by AI, so manually it's very, very cumbersome and it requires a lot of expertise in computer vision analysis either by coding or by running an AI model or something like this, so it's it's a lot of steps. So producing all these supports requires a lot of steps manually, yeah.

Anna, how about if you would have to map vision for the satellite image. How long would it take to, uh, manually with your own eyes to do the same kind of like, uh, report about the area. You know, probably for experts they can look at the map and they can understand why. So if you go in one of the slides there is something that I wanted to point out. You can see the map of Houston and next to it you see the temperature distribution,

and you can see there's like large line in the middle of the map. That's a highway in Houston, so and it is on the map with the surface temperature. This line is the the most intense hotline in that map, and it's very understandable. So and an expert can look at the map and say, Yeah, I know this is hard because, uh, yeah, there's a lot of industrial places here and a lot of traffic and no vegetation and dark surfaces, asphalt, a lot of asphalt

So it is for people, they can look at it and understand why, but maybe again this tool can be good first. Students who are trying to understand things, look at a small area at a time and see what's a driving the heat up and what we can do to mitigate the problems of urban heat island.

OK, thank you. And there's a question in the audience. Hi, hi, thank you. Uh, it was a really interesting presentation. Thank you. Um, you're talking a lot about academic use, but I'm wondering if this would not be a great tool for policymakers as a kind of like quick analysis if they are planning a new urban development, and they are still like evaluating their options if that would be not a good thing and then related to that if there is room to, for example, put certain policies already into

the program so that it then gives you mitigation options that it is already aligned with what policymakers have in mind for for the city development.

That's actually a great idea. I haven't think about it, so maybe that can be my future work is integrating policy and recommendations in the work. Yes, I think this tool can apply for that situation, and we can even um overlay other important information for real estate developers and, you know, people trying to drive up market in specific places. So yeah, definitely this tool can be used for this. Yeah, I know. I keep saying that this is an academic tool, academ

ic tool, uh, because here I am in an AI conference, but yeah, don't trust large language models yet. So I know it's, it's weird, but I'm telling the truth here, but it's, it's OK. It's good for a quick analysis like you said, the quick analysis for policymakers and everything, uh, so yeah, that can be my future work. Thank you.

So, and the last question was that, uh, is this uh publicly available? Can we, can we go in somewhere and use it.

Kind of, yeah, I'm uploading this. I think I uploaded it already in GitHub, so

I should have put a QF code here, but it's, I have a GitHub repository where you can get the code and run it in your own server, so the dashboard that I've been showing for everyone who run it on my own server, but once you run the code or run a server for you. You have to install some and, you know, dependencies first, but yeah, we'll run that the same exact server for you. Uh, so this is my GitHub repository. If it's not uploaded, I might have

uploaded it, but only um uh available privately, but I'll make it publicly once I'm done.

OK, thank you so much. Uh, keep a hand for Dr. Ronny Alape.

and the next speaker is Rope Paloma. He, he's here, yeah, and, uh, he's, uh, storytellers about this really finished problem, uh, winter rogues and some multi-agent things. Welcome.

Hm

Yeah

Yes, good morning, everyone. My name is Rope Paloma, and today I'm telling a little bit about my master thesis, which was titled AI Du Winter Road Maintenance, a roadmap for municipal decision support, and this was published last December.

So, first, a little bit about rumble. We have been founded in 1945 and we have over 18,000 experts all over the world, but let's just go on. So the goal of the study was to search how AI could promote the winter maintenance process in the city of Yascula ranging from all the way to from business related questions all the way to the.

day to day actions done in the road network and the study was done in two ways. The first part was the literatory review that examined current research and practices how AI could work in context of road winter maintenance and the second part was the empirical study where I interviewed the experts, and that helped to map the current state of U vascular's winter road maintenance process and it need

s

and as a result, I designed the framework for an AI solution and a roadmap for the gradual development of the set framework system.

and in the context of your vascular winter maintenance process, but that is pretty scalable to the other cities.

and useful results can be achieved already.

with the pilot presented in the early phases of the roadmap.

So I did 10 interviews and all of them was with the winter maintenance process specialist from the city of Yvascula, and that helped to map the situational picture and development needs of the Uvascular sphincter maintenance process and bit of interviews was with the AI experts from different universities from Finland and that helped to provide me the most up to-date information on different solutions and how they could help with the winter road maintenance.

So by a AI is needed in the winter road maintenance, uh, there is the 3 big reasons which are emission reductions, cost effectiveness, and safety and quality. I rescula aims to reduce traffic emissions by 40% in

by 2030 and also the winter maintenance is major annual expense in the city's budget. So allocating resources at the right time reduces unnecessary operation, can streamline routes and thereby reduce emissions and costs and also there is the safety and quality aspect of it that timely actions reduce accidents and improve accessibility for everyone.

and provide the safe and functional road network.

and

the current state in the city of Vivascula, they are doing this self-managed model that basically means that the city owns its own personnel who does the majority of the work, and they only use the contractors as the additional resource and they are also doing this dynamic operating model that means that the intended level for the street or even for the street segment is defined verbally rather than using these precise mareer thresholds when our

and that also goes for the equipment used in the streets and they are the they are designed the most suitable equipment and that they are using across area boundaries.

and there are also some challenges with this kind of model that recurs a lot of manual work. They need to constantly keep looking the information from the street and maintain the situational picture

and also the response is often more uh reactive rather than proactivate to the better changes.

and as we have heard many times in this event, uh, and I also heard from the experts time and time again that AI cannot be utilized effectively if the foundational data is not in order, but by combining different types of data.

we can build a comprehensive situational picture, also known as a digital twin.

which mirrors sacsatus of your vascular street network, and that is the key for the AI solution that provides the context window to produce

high quality relevant results and recommendations and city of Uvascula, they had a lot of different kinds of data sources already, but they were fragmented to different systems. They have uh inconsistent practices and varying data quality.

but they also had the uh want to cooperate with the different parts of the process. So I think there is a lot of hope there and to the

answer to this issue is basically the harmonization and standardization of data and thereby improving the quality of data, and here in the slide is the

uh data collection layer and database layer of the proposed framework and as you can see the AI models are in the middle of everything, and we, I found that in this kind of system, uh, we cannot just use one type of AI and we need to use a couple of them basically so large language models and their ability to understand and produce natural language which helped to use the proposed system

uh, more intuitively and easily.

and also deep neural networks that are doing most of the data analysis and trend identification and also machine learning morales that are good with dynamic growth optimization and prediction of maintenance needs and as you can see there are two kinds of databases the vector database or in this case rack is used to store that low frequency data that is not updating second by 2nd and 2nd by second data such

as sensors from the road network are stored in time series database, and these two databases form the digital twin.

and in the end all the data is stored in data warehouse which can be used to train AI models and provide the historical information to the model.

And of course with this kind of system where we use AI, there is always risks which are data models, organization and information security and a little bit about the AI models, there is the black box nature of of them and hallucination of language models where we need to expose the reasoning by chain of thought and use them as help and not by replacement of human.

and also the feedback loop and rigorous testing process at first.

first when we start to use the system and also the organization level there is knowledge and can there can be resistance to change the ways of work, and we need to train and communicate very well with the people who use the system.

and tell about the early wins, uh, publicly, so everyone can see the concrete benefits of using this kind of new system.

So, uh, this is the roadmap, first part of the roadmap, and that is the go short term development path where the goal is to make benefits of AI concrete, unlimited scale with limited budget. So first pilot is a language models about language models where we analyze documents and files about the Winter road maintenance with help of a A lamps, and we choose the best or a couple of the best.

models and we can use them.

uh to get there with the help of A2A protocol, and then we have uh chosen them.

LLM we can use it to analyze the winter road maintenance feedback and short and thereby response times.

by categorizing the coming incoming feedback and then we need to harmonize the data, improve the quality of it, and then we can start to build the database architect to recruit for the larger AI solution and side by side with these pilots there is the organization's skill level growth because the personnel who are in the end using the system are involved with these pilots, so they understand that coming product better.

And the second part of the roadmap is long term development path where the goal is to scale those earlier pilots into comprehensive AI-based winter road maintenance management system where we start with the analyzing those earlier pilots where we not only consider technical results but also interview the involved personnel because they usually knows the best what worked, what could be better, and what could be improved, and then we moved the data ana

ly s is with AI where we start to search different kind of new correlations and repat recognition with the AI and then we can start to build the whole, whole system be the.

integration of pilots and in the end when that most of the work is done, we can um also do this virtual assistance for the road network users where the virtual assistant can provide immediate answers to the users who are maybe asking when my street is plowed or something similar so that helps to improve the happiness of the road network users and here is the end.

so a digital twin that is multilayered entity in the top of everything there is data incoming to the collection layer and then the data is processed into databases.

and middle of everything is the intelligent core, basically the AI models where it's data processing is happening

and then what user is seeing is the use role-based views because they may be that who is doing that win the road maintenance in the street, needs to see different kinds of things than one who is actually planning it.

and in conclusion,

we have this shift in operating mode that AI enables a shift from more reactive approach toward a preventive mode of operation, and this can even out resource spikes and improve the quality of services for the street and road network users.

and this kind of system to work and success is that we need to see the AI technology as the enabler and not as the obstacle and the biggest work definitely lies in unifying the data infrastructure and developing the organizational cultura.

but here is everything and here is the QR code for my full masters thesis if someone is interested, interested, and now I'm very happy to answer all the questions. Thank you.

Thank you, Rope. That was really, really nice presentation and uh it's the questions in the audience, yeah, um, so my name is Matihota, um, work also with

AI. How well did you actually meet the three goals which were

uh, if I remember correctly, uh, costs, then the perceived quality by the users and then uh the third one was CO2 targets. I mean, you said something that, yeah, it was great success, but

how well did you actually meet these goals? Yeah, so here we only designed the framework and not really build so there is no concrete results, but we found that there is possibility for all those categories to improve.

So thank you

Any other questions?

So my question is that where are you with this? So is it going to be implemented or is it already implemented in the city of Vivascula or we are in talks to maybe starts to work or that they are doing some other work for now, but nothing concrete, but maybe in the future.

Yeah

Uh, if no other questions, thank you, Rope.

Big hand for Robin. Thank you.

And uh

so there's a little break. We will continue in this room 1005 and have a nice day.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "Climate Technology" session at AI in AEC 2026 highlighted innovative AI applications for addressing environmental challenges. Rania Labib presented her agentic AI workflow for urban heat island (UHI) analysis, focusing on the impact of rising urban temperatures on energy consumption and air quality. Using Houston, Texas—a rapidly urbanizing city with limited canopy coverage—as a case study, Labib demonstrated how NDVI and NDBI indices correlate vegetation and built-up areas with land surface temperature, revealing urbanization's disproportionate effect on heat intensity.

The workflow integrates computer vision and large language models (LLMs) into a multi-agent AI pipeline that automates satellite image acquisition, preprocessing, segmentation (15–30 minutes), tiling (2–2.5 hours), and report generation, reducing analysis time to three hours per city. The Python- and Flask-based dashboard allows users to select cities, adjust parameters, and analyze tiles, producing city-scale reports, temperature distribution graphs, and AI-driven tile classifications. Recommendations for mitigating heat effects include cool roofs, permeable pavements, and vegetation expansion, addressing intensity drivers like asphalt and industrial areas.

Labib emphasized the tool's teaching applications for non-experts, such as students, while audience questions underscored its potential for integrating policy frameworks, supporting real estate development, and saving time compared to manual analysis. She also discussed future work on batch multi-city analysis, multi-temporal studies, and higher-resolution images. Accessible via GitHub, the tool provides raw data for further analysis, making it a valuable resource for academic and practical applications alike.

Speakers

AV

Arto Väisänen

-

Sweco

RL

Rania Labib

-

Prairie View A&M University

RP

Roope Palomaa

-

Ramboll

================================================================================
SESSION 11: Session 8: Sustainable Business Models
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

But

it's a huge opportunity

We need to build more and more

globally

and there is more demand for ASC.

vector

So it's a bit like a

dilemma. I would hope that there wouldn't be only

a few winners

and a lot of losers, but it requires that

we have this sort of events and this kind of opportunities.

to

collaborate and find innovative solutions and be open and uh

really developed offerings of different types of companies. because the whole supply chain most likely

will see very different

and uh

it is not

so evident that we will be

taking the

lead

or who should take the lead

in this transformation

My hint of that is that

it's the

tack of money that should be pressing the button. Practically the buyers providing the investment.

opportunity for the whole supply chain to develop the.

solutions. And I don't mean that they need to pay more. I mean that they need to purchase differently.

I was so delighted.

at first time, what I have experienced this January in Sweden, traffic worker, which is one of the largest

uh

public buyers

They have a public tender where AIs

very much weighted in the

quality criteria

but also they are ready to pay back of every single saving made.

with AI

and it's significant, 30%.

and that's a lot. We're talking about

10 s of millions of crowns, millions of euros.

potential paybacks

That's one example, but in this session we are deep diving

the different angles that

how the business models could be looking in the future, how this whole industry is changing.

and we get a very, very interesting

thorough view, all from a national level to industry-specific development project in Sweden.

down to a consultancy level and even data level view on this.

topic.

But to get started, uh, we are very delighted to have a friend and a great speaker from uh the Netherlands from the TK

I

providing us a more natural level view on the topic. So let's give big uploads for butter big.

So great to be here and 2 years ago I was in the audience and I thought I come back when I present and not because I want to present a search, but what I've seen is great examples of how the industry is moving forward in applying AI for better outcomes and help us to deal with those challenges we face, but they also noticed that a lot of the examples shown are really under projects organizational level.

My personal view is, and that's my work, I do at Tiba and technique is really how can we do that more collectively asset owners, research institutes, governments, and the industry together.

because the challenge is much bigger than we can do ourselves alone. We need each other. And therefore, I tell my story a little bit more on the macro level explicitly and therefore I think it's a good start for this session. Take a little bit of bigger picture, ending up with his own examples, but also put some groundwork for the others to follow.

Um, and, um, I do this from a perspective that I have a background in the industry, have been engineered by background, but also have been in digital transformation for over the last 10 years. So I have my personal experiences about how challenging it is to connect what needs to be done and how technology can help us with that.

Because if you look at those challenges, um, and this is the Dutch situation, I think the Netherlands as a use case. You normally talk about practical use case. I take a whole country as a use case to make my point. We see, you know, these numbers, um, and is this an issue? Yes, it is an issue because it's not just an industry problem. It's an economic problem. It's a societal problem in the longer run. If we don't deal with our breaches that are getting older and older and older. We have

our our traffic literally will stand still at the moment, which is an issue, of course. So I think it's important that the, the challenge at hand is bigger and bigger.

It's growing on, on one hand. On the other hand, if you look for my economic perspective, we have another challenge not only in our sector but in other sectors as well, is that our productivity has not been growing as such. And that's the graph on the right-hand side here you see there that if compared to industry, our labor productivity, which is one element of productivity and economies can, you can have an economic debate about it. I won't do that here. It's stagnating for the last 10 years and even declining. Is that

not and you could have argued what is the reason behind it is because we are less effective, are we less efficient? Are we, are things getting simply more complex. I think that is also the case, but what's also clear is that we deal with the challenge, but how can we grow that? How can we adopt technology for us as a sector. And then we all know due to the nature of the industry that we are struggling there and we talk a lot about conference like this about not today but even about AI.

But if you go back to, back to, to BIM, it's still not being fully implemented in everything we do. And so there's still a lot to be done and there's a challenge because the challenge is emerging is becoming bigger, shown in this picture. So because the, the challenge at hand is growing on one hand.

significantly, and it's not just about doing more with the same, but we're doing more with less, especially in the Netherlands, but I think it's more for more European countries the case. And we have a huge retirement wave coming at us. And so a lot of knowledge, uh will leave our sector in the next couple of years. So how do we do more with less? And I, I truly believe we need to do two things. One is we much more need to collaborate on this challenge from an innovation and knowledge development perspective

because that is the lens I take. TKII is stop kunzochi for knowledge and innovation. We need to collaborate much more, and secondly, we need to bridge that gap between the societal challenges and the opportunity technology brings us, and I think you do that every day, but as a sector, we still have a lot to be done. And that was why, uh, 3 years ago in the Netherlands they created this platform which I'm the acting managing director of of today to really do this collectively. How can we

have big society challenges worked much more together to take that step, develop those innovations in a scalable way. Um, and therefore, again, technology plays a key role. So not just and we do that in two ways. One is in programs and missions and those kinds of things that were really in an ecosysystem collaborate collaborate, but on purposely I had a build by AI on top of beyond that and make sure that if we do that, we also every day try to bridge that gap between the challenge and the

opportunity of technology, often referred to as the twin transition, which I personally really like because I think they are big two challenges at once. The the sustainable transition on one hand and the technology transition on the other hand.

And it gives you all kinds of dilemmas, huh? It are different ecosystems for a part. You can go to conference on sustainability and resilience. You can go to a conference on technology, but where do they really come together? If you go into technology space a threat or challenge of AI is to use of energy it takes. And so also there comes a dilemma in place. It's a paradox. It's a dilemma we have to face and deal with. Now, luckily, and we have a challenge, of course, we're on the bottom of the charts sector. This is a stat in the Netherlands about AI adop

tion but you see these reaches coming on that. Yes, we try to move, but we move slowly.

From a policy level at European levels, the left hand side and the right hand side is the national level. I'm happy to see that at least acknowledge that construction is an important sector for this challenge and in AI.

and that is, I say a little bit surprised, not because we don't know being in the sector, but from an economic perspective, a construction is always seen as is a big sector which is really enabling for the more profitable sectors, high tech, for example, but high tech won't function if there are no houses, no roads, for the logistics and the people to work in. And but I really like to see that at least we start moving into this, acknowledging we need AI for that. On the other hand, at the national level, we have also our strategies

and I think it's important to know that there are a couple of design criteria in there which really goes to her how we from a national perspective look to things.

about federated data sharing. I won't elaborate on that here too much, but I think it's crucial. It's about the role of people and human human from being the loop and doing the work to in the loop, being part of the work to own the loop, right, look about how AI is helping us and how we do that in the right way, provided some guardrails. And for me, talking about people, that's 80% of the challenge and share. It's not about getting more AI people to our sector but make professionals in our sector AI minded, which is

a totally different approach as well.

Now what did I do personally to get it a little bit ongoing. I wrote a paper after the conference two years ago. I said, OK, we have this challenge of renovating those bridges and houses. How can I help? But I also acknowledge what do we need to do because analyzing is one, but making it actionable is another thing.

So I said, in everything, in every innovation we take, we need to start looking in how can we put it on the agenda.

even in my own backyard of these innovation programs, AI is not always on the agenda. We look also at other innovation but we need to bring it together.

Then we need to just try to learn and experiment. I think there's a lot to be learned.

and it's about applying it, huh, applying and learning.

We need to build that new ecosystem where domain knowledge, AI expertise come together and truly collaborate.

We need to build a digital mindset that's for me the most important thing and 70%, 80%, 94% fail because of adoption challenges. I think that's an analysis, we know it, but how to do it is a different thing because mindset goes beyond skills. It's also about how we collaborate, how we communicate. It's about leadership, much more topics as well, and a kind of a different speech about it as well. And we needed some governance, and we need to know how do we do these things right? What is good like? What is ethical right? How do we deal with that data?

How do we share the data in a trustful and meetingful way, and then you get back to the federated data sharing.

and therefore I said, OK, if you want to do this, we need to do it together. So we built that we simply start and say, OK, let's do what's easiest, just share what's there, so we started to ask people to present their use case, present their examples. We set it up a podcast series where ask at her, CIOs in the industry to come in and tell their challenges by applying I just telling like we do here today. We don't to a wider group of business leaders for people also outside the AI bubble.

Now, how does the material is a little bit further that we say, OK, the platform is nice, but we need to do a couple of things.

And one is in those programs, let's put the challenge first. It's also with on your company level, start with the problem and then look at the technology, not the other way around, but you can also do that if you look at the housing challenge, for example. So how, what are the big burning issues in housing. It's permitting, for example, or is a long value change or is how do we make better decisions with all these complex dimensions and how to involve the future you, uh, uh, buyer or user of the house into debt.

I think that our value cases where AI really can help. Um, it's about ecosystem and building up these new ecosystems of collaboration in a trustful, open way using principles like open standard, federated data sharing to really collaborate and take value from it instead of competing because in from an economic perspective,

there is no reason to compete in our sector. Why should we with shortage? We don't have over overload. So we need to collaborate because there's more to be done than we can do ourselves, but it's also mind shift change.

Um, it's about scalable building blocks and I've seen in the previous session great examples about how to use knowledge graphs, for example, for that, but are multipolar.

and really make sure that they are start being developed and used beyond individual use cases. So scalability in mind is essential and the chairman of best practices because you people learn by seeing how it does do it yourself, and then apply it yourself. That's how it's really about keep on telling what's going on, what's also what's not doing well. Now, I'm personally really happy that since January 1st in the Netherlands we have this came to a concrete tangible AI for housing program where

our government said, hey, let's, let's without a big plan about what we're exactly going to do. Let's take 1 million of our budget, and let's explore together. Let's learn with the ecosystem housing, how I can really help as a step forward on this challenge. And we look on four perspectives. One is let's build random number 15 simple value cases.

show how AI, not AI, you can do it by a company or by an individual play where we need to collaborate, how that creates value by doing so, showing.

2 is built on a a mindset framework for the sector. Yes, we talk a lot about skills. We talk a little bit about mindset broadly, but how do we apply to a housing corporation, to a construction company, to a employee for in the public service who is responsible for dealing with those challenges, so we built an AI mindset approach

3, we look really about how do we do that right? What are the kind of boundary conditions to get in place so there's about frameworks. This is not about, it can be technical, it can be ethical. It's also the challenge if you have a great startup with a great AI ID in our sector. You have the first great talk with your clients, and then you have a second talk with the privacy officer, and then it becomes difficult because we are reinventing how to do these things time and time, so standardizing, uh, helping with guidelines in our case, be really helpful.

And, um, and yes, that ecosystem is key here, so this is really if you ask me where are you in one year time, I hope to present the results of that right-hand program, not only for housing, but that some of people in this room here, we also look, want to look how do we do this for infrastructure? How do you collaborate really on this and not just within only the asset owner, the engineering firm of the contractor or the research institute.

And having said that, I think it's for me important, this is a little bit. I won't to elaborate too much here, but I think if we do this, keep in mind there are a couple of enablers we need to have in place, data standards, mindset, ethics, and I talked about it. It's a ground layer, but if you start looking at the use case, also make sure that we look from multiple perspectives, right? There's a lot of talk, not much here maybe, but of course, me, myself and AI, how does it raise productivity for my individual

work and does it actually

or does it create a next problem. There's a lot of debate about it as well.

What I'll see a lot of emerging is, and that's, I think mostly can be done by companies is how do we embed it in your workflows in and things you do more often. I see a lot of uptake if it's about tendering processes where we see a lot of agents coming in and even agentic workflows. We're tendering is being optimized. For me, I always this strange question. OK, if you do that on the cli on the both sides, who is then making a decision in the end? Is it the agent against the agent and who wins and who oversees that.

But the, the right-hand side is much more harder. It's about how do we embed it in our buildings in our a smart buildings, AI, how do we embed it all our products in our components, and there are a lot that's happening as well. There's scalability and how do we do it in our projects? And I think there are across this conference multiple examples. But I think this also helps that this is kind of framework you use that AI for housing program to make sure we take different perspectives and don't end up with only the big generative AI tools of today, but also keep looking in what has been around

there for years before.

Now, so to round up some simple exa some examples that already emerging from this. This is one of the examples where we look at routes and degradation of roads.

And yet, why is this example important not so much about the technology. There's another presentation almost, but this shows that we really need to bring data together. We only can do this if the

asset owner, the municipality, the contractor, the maintenance company starts sharing data.

use the domain or look in the AI expertise together and then we learn how can we create this model and better predict when we do to need to do maintenance of these routes. That huge challenge and you want you want to do it once, if you, if you have been to Amsterdam, opening roads is not that effective for city logistics. Another example is about housing, we have a lot of housing in the Netherlands about from I think 50 years old. We need to renovate them, but it seems by the I notes are scalable how to do

that. But if you look beyond that and you say, OK, but they have been built in a certain age and in a certain age we use the same kind of building systems, and that is important to know and AI can help us on that. Where are what building systems used, not just by visual data and computer vision, but combining that with talks with architects combined with building archives, combining it with other information. And I think by doing that and creating these multimodal, these models where we bring that together, it can really help us to make better informed decision

when to do what. Why do we need to do this in a public-private partnership because it is a collective investment to collective knowledge for benefits of everybody. But just for an individual player, it's not a value case itself and so collectively there is individually is more difficult.

So having said that, I'm rounding off now. I'm a little bit one minute almost around my time. I think my story was a little bit, uh, if we need to really step up our game and productivity growth. I think there is this activity opportunity with AI, but next to what we already doing today, we need to come together, work together, learn, together, apply together.

And I see luckily uh great examples emerging that we really take that step year by year forward, and we need to, and we need to accelerate even more. Thank you for your attention.

Thank you, Bart for very interesting views. Uh, reminder, please use the website evenventos for get your questions here or then you can now raise your hand. We have time for one more.

two questions at least for Bart, so.

Anybody who wants to ask something regarding this, this topic and presentation.

Totally clear or look. No, I can, I can at least ask, ask one question and the audience can think um

just that uh

I understand it correctly. So,

this is a national level initiative or or how is it financed and how the private companies connect to this. Now I think um

in our sector, government as it has multiple roles, especially in infrastructure. They are the asset owner, they are the legislator, they are the permitted provider.

So if you look at our industry and I think we see it with the Dutch government and they have a role to national government is willing to play a role. That's one thing. On the other hand, it's not just a game of government and asset owners. It's a collaborative effort and that's why we found out if we want to do that, we need to create a place, infrastructure organizations like take a platform where you really can set up a collection if we work on those programs.

And so I think it's in everything we do we try to bring together public and private partners. And in the example of the growth fund, the first one actually companies are co-investing as well, so it's really a public-private partnership model to do so, because then there is a benefit. There's an input and output of everybody involved, and that's crucial.

Now we have, yeah, there we have at least 11 question.

Hi, good morning. Uh, thank you both for the presentation. Um, I have a question looking at macro level and looking at the industry contractual agreements are of course part of collaboration and a certain form of collaboration on projects. How do you see the influences of certain contract formats like an integrated project delivery, or as we call it in Belgium neck 4 where you have a collaborative contract. How is that open

ing up, ah, or, um, limiting that collaboration on data sharing, uh, and, and sharing knowledge. Now I think one of the barriers and opportunities lies on the contraction site, so I, um, and there

I think there are two sides to the story. One, that we can do, there's more possible than we often do or know can be done, and I think the example you refer to probably an example of that. We also have seen the Netherlands when we procure 5 schools at once. It set an auto dynamics in place if we procure 300 bridges to be recalculated, set the dynamic in place, huh? And that that contractual forms that are allowed within the frameworks, but we don't know them, have not used them that often, so every

easily go back to what we know. Procurement by specs. So I think there isn't once it's an opportunity and I think in my view if you have a longer more program of things you do together. It's better and easier to innovate and implement these kinds of things. I think the example you mentioned from Sweden also fits in that. It can be done. That's one side of the story. On the other side of the story, I think still the legal frameworks, especially in Europe, are still designed not for her. The challenges of today.

So I, I'm, once I'm positive that they're looking into it now and try to change it. I'm a little bit reluctant to see how do we actually change it. So, um, so I think it's an opportunity and a threat to do this, but I think that it's often more possible than we know, but also there we need to innovate. And not all barrier, specialists are innovators themselves that much, so we need to help them a little bit.

All in all, I think that it's great that you try to collaborate and uh

came to share the examples. So thanks a lotly give applause for piping.

All right, then, we move on on the program and uh get a bit more practical example and uh I need to excuse myself for one second actually now there are 3 speakers first time and I

lost one last name and I

don't want to do a mistake again, so.

but probably better to read it, but it's regarding AI playbook, uh, that, uh, Iroup has done in collaboration with um the building information Foundation RTS and uh let's give a warm welcome to Pieti Mariavara and Jonas Leftovara from Audience Group and uh

Tommy Arola from Building Information Foundation.

Oh

Alrighty

Good morning everybody. Um

very happy to be here. Uh, this is also an announcement, uh, because we are now, we have been published, uh, a, a playbook for the AEC sector. It's not only in Finland. Now, now for the whole community in AEC sector. It's, it's international. My name is Tom M Arola. I'm coming for building Information Foundation. I have a colleague, colleagues from, from our engineered, uh, Jonas and, and Petty and we are going to show you a couple of insights, what we have been doing.

uh regarding the labook because actually, the previous speaker said a very good scenery to, for us to, to go through about the

issues, what needs to be done in a, in an organizational level. But I go

into the details what we have been doing, uh, we started in 2024, our project to, to cover uh the localization of AI in organization level or as well as in, in, in Finland in, in a whole community level. Uh, we know that there's a significant growth in, in AI application. Uh, big tech companies are have a big role in AI, but how AEC sector can can be involved with this this development

because there are big language models and that's kind of a development with big tech companies are doing, how we can effect on those.

So what we wanted to have a discussion about localization.

We need to have a solid foundation for AEC AI application. That was one of the core cornerstone for the for our playbook and as well as the localization in a community level and in organizational level.

Uh, we have been sharing a little, a lot of thoughts about what is the situation in, in AEC sector. Uh, lots of application, law, uh, return on investments, high energy consumption. There are now the green effect of AI also emerging. And, and we need to somehow tackle this issue and, and also understand the, what is the meaning for, for, for organization. We need to be aware how we can make the workflow for AI happen in

organization level. How can we

do the, make the, the organization practices to, to, to go to go, go with this.

Uh, it turned out that that copyright and data ownership concerns are quite, quite big.

For this reason

we set up the uh AR playbook for the for the finish local ecosystem first, and now it's now published in English as well, for the, for the international community. It covers two pots, situation picture, and, and the content side. Actually, I realized that from the previous speaker, uh, we are, we, we are doing the walkthrough

of these issues about how we need to, uh, agree on data, data usage for AI application. how we can deal with the risk management.

data traceability, good use case, what, what are the parameters for, for QGU's case, a new business opportunities. This book covers 5 sections, thematic sessions, sections for

for handling these issues. Uh, we try to be as updated as possible. Of course, the, the, the, the area is going on very, very, uh, tight and, and then that's why the, the, this is a living document as well.

So a couple of pickups, uh, about the data agreements. First, uh, that's a big 11 corner store actually where we started this this whole issue, uh, which it turned out that that there are lots of big questions what needs to be answered and there is in this playbook, uh, uh, some, some, uh, takeaways from, from these questions, how long the data will be used for, and these are actually these considering what needs to be done in, in

uh, in a, when you have an agreement on AI data usage.

The same goes for the risk management. There are lots of issues that need to be clear when you deal with the project and the project level, you know, organizational level, how to trust

the AI solutions. Uh, we wanted to tackle this, this in the um in the playbook as well.

Covering all these issues in a in a in a one

small picture with lots of texts, uh, we wanted to have all the coal community consider at least this uh kind of an uh uh takeaways for, for us a room uh house uh table for, for each individual as well as for, for organizations, uh, uh, these are bundled in, in a 11 infographic or what you can see. And, and these are, are kind of on takeaways from all of the dissections.

Um

I'm not going to do any more details now. Jonas will show us some case examples what does this means in an organizational level. The floor is yours.

Thank you. Thank you, Tommy. So

good, good morning for my behalf as well. Uh in the next 3 slides, I think I'm going to give you around 3 most interesting notions that we realized by myself realized when we were making or creating the playbook, and ideas on

exactly on that how it affects the organizational level and maybe it is transforming organizations in the future.

So, uh, first, AI enables new kinds of business and roughly you could divide this into two different sections. Uh, there are business opportunities in a way or in this kind of uh this kind of uh ways that has been apparent before, for example, valuedriven consulting that has been around at least for as long as I've been in the industry, but maybe are coming more apparent or more viable as AI is enabling new ways of ways of doing work. Uh, at the same time, uh, there are also

new business models emerging, for example, related to data economy related things that has become apparent that has become visible only in the last couple of years. Uh.

enabling this kind of business models and new kind of business, of course, is not something that you have to completely focus only. It's something that you can build up on what you're doing at the moment, which requires effort. It requires resources. It requires time, but at the same time, if you want to be a forerunner, if you want to be the first to be doing this stuff and taking all all out of the benefits that you can have it or it could make sense to put more effort on those, those new opportunities and exploring these opportunities right on right on now

in the next couple of years

Second, uh, trading AI from the organizational practice point of view. I'm sure you've heard it many times today and yesterday, but AI is not just a technical. Technical thing, but also a thing that you have to look from social, social and organizational change point of view, means that you need to train your people. You need to make sure that people have resources, understanding, utilizing the newest tools, prioritizing foundational knowledge. This is something that we tried to implement and make visible throughout this playbook.

that it's not only the newest features and the newest technology that you have at hand, but these so-called metaskis understanding, for example, data security, and so on is something that you need to have awareness when you're moving forward.

Uh, focusing also on people's well-being, meaning that, uh, if you're trying to build up on top of the 100% that people are already doing, then you stop meaning people would be burdened with 120, 10 to 30% of capacity. It's not going to work in the long term, meaning that you need to give time for learning, need to give time for reflection, uh, understand that it takes a lot of cognitive effort for people to take all of this stuff in and make it happen. So making sure that you're not overburdening

your your employees and your teams while they're doing the change.

And third, uh, AI is as I'm sure you also heard is part of developing new skills, part of developing new roles and uh

and changing the current roles in the in the AIC sector. One example would be that for example project engineers that has been traditionally quite uh knowledge-driven work, meaning that you are compiling data you are maybe producing information for the project manager, could be changed in a way that you are more of a, for example, AI agent team coordinator, meaning that you might require a lot of different skills, but what you have needed before. And in my, my point of view, the idea is not that AI is ripped

It's not, it's not replacing the jobs that we have, but it's alternating the roles and the different or creating new roles that we have at the moment.

3 takeaways, which kind of skills in my point of view would be the most, most needed in the future while you're implementing AI. It's critical areas of media literacy, meaning that you understand if you read something from the internet, something that is created by AEI, you can critically reflect if it's true, if it's validated, where the information come from, and so on. Uh, awareness of the information security, meaning that you understand which kind of caveats pitfalls you might have while you're using AI. You're using information

technology. It's of course has been around for a long time, but I think the importance of this is coming, coming up quite a lot now and in the future. And third, reflecting what I said in the previous slide, a critical reflection on on uh on the idea that how you colo is might be increasing while they're doing AI. So understanding that as a personal level, team level, organizational level, you need to create space and give space for the learning and and uh

uh and, and, and doing all of this new stuff and not just trying to put it on everything else that they're doing already.

So with that, I'm to pass it to Pieti for the for the last part.

So I'm going to tell you about the practical uses of uh this playbook and uh

in actual project.

The first time general tips that uh actually in the long run, it, it makes sense for you to focus on ethical use of AI and the smart practices instead of some fast change in technology.

and uh

we have a lot of stuff in the, in the playbook, so you can actually cherry pick the things that you need in your project. Of course, everything that we've written is golden, right? And then the third one is that uh uh start training people during the onboarding of the project because you don't know the background of the peoples or what the AI maturity is, so you need to start training it. It from the start, and you need to have a AI policy and, and, and you really need to commit to it.

And everybody understands why.

And, uh, here's our, our case study Pro, it's an infrastructure program here in Helsinki. It's an urban development project that's ongoing right now. You can find more details from the link and you can, you can see it all the organizations involved with this, uh, this, this is uh uh actually two alliances are doing this.

So

on, on the left-hand side, we, we have the West Housing light rail and, uh, and then there's also right here in downtown Helsinger is the West Harbor Light rail, and, and then on the right-hand side there will be Viki Mami Larail and when everything is done,

the year would be 2033.

So, um,

what we want to do is uh we have a really strong and good knowledge management team and knowledge management systems. So we want to bring AI on top of it and to really help our experts. And of course, we want to be responsible while doing it, so responsible use of AI, a responsible to the people and, and responsible to the environment and you can see our goals on the right-hand side. And

this is, this is what we call our AI journey that everybody is involved. Everybody is, is doing their chair.

and, and we are introducing this uh new concept called Project AI. So it actually, it's really simple that first we teach people what AIH is and then we did AI how to do construction in Helsinki. And this is what you get.

And so now the

old people would laugh and young people should google out what how 90,000 is, but also the project they are as a part. So the first thing here is to fundamentals which we are using our playbook. So and, and, and second, we are

giving this really good

AI

for people, people's daily life to use and that, and then we are localizing how to build in Helsinki that we, we have a knowledge graph that actually this is more so then that's why we call it the context sphere and we have all the documents, all the decisions, time frames, even the discussions of people are, people are talking about why they make this decision so that we get the tacit knowledge from the experts

And, and then the fourth stage would be that uh with, with top of this.

unique knowledge, we will give people uh

agents and 8 and flows to be used in, in their daily life.

told me

OK, last but not least, uh,

it's open

And uh we're happy to share this with you. Uh, and, and actually this is a kind of a foundation now what we have been doing. If there's something to, to you would like to discuss with us. We are open for it. Uh, and, uh, it enables lots of things, as Perdi told us, uh, it's in a project level. You can use this kind of a playbook to get the project fundaments, but also I have realized that that some organizations

in Finland have now taken this displaybook to, to develop their own principles. So it's usable for this. Uh, we would very be very happy if, if you share with us if you use it, or if there is something to be proved. So this is open, open call for, for, for the community as well. We try to do our best, uh, uh, driving through this, this AI field and, and, and the good practices. So let's keep ethical with AI. Thank you.

Thanks a lot for very interesting presentation. I, I got a request that if all the speakers can stand this side of the uh podium when we have this thing. So if you can come a couple of meters this side so that the stream will be seeing as well, but, uh, yeah, any questions from the audience, uh, I can check if there is something arriving here, but uh there we have at least one hand.

Hi, thank you. Uh, actually, I have a question from the first gentleman. I don't remember your name. Yeah, so the from one, I think 2 slide, you have a

promoting permanent meta skills. So do you think that this kind of meta skills. I'm not sure whether you mentioned transverbal skills or uh other thing you have in your mind, but do you think this kind of resource from people is coming from very short period of training or do we need some highly

skilled people and to like invest on those already, you know, skilled people or not. It's kind of like having that kind of training like the already team that you can, but it's because I'm think that is not gonna happen, you know, in a very short period of time, that kind of AI literacy. So I would like to have your view, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's thank you. That's a really good question. So I would frame it in a way that

some people are, if you're not something that spends all of their days looking for what's happening in the area and not, not seeing or having time to look at what has happened in the last two weeks. I think.

one point that I'm trying to make is that it doesn't, it's not the end of the world if you're not understanding the current, the most newest technology happening right now, but most important is that in the next 35 years, you develop this more, more deeper skills, uh, in a way that you can understand. For example, as you mentioned, data literacy understanding which kind of information could be viable, which kind of things you have to look when you look for new information, for example, and this is, I think this is something that everybody could learn. You can

learn it over time. It is not, it's not something that you have to spend 1020 hours per week on looking, but something that you can develop over time and uh it's not only for the people who are the most, I would say, tech savvy about everybody in the organization and, and this is something that the organization can give you resources, but at the same time it's something like I think you can develop as a bug, for example, when you have some extra time, time in your work.

Hope I'm, hope I'm answered the question.

So I don't remember which presentation was, but mentioned that we need some extra work. We need to consider some extra work for the team to have free time to upskill themselves, yeah. So it means that another resource, which is time.

So we need to compromise time versus people, highly skilled people, you know, to get those kind of skills, you definitely need time. So it's kind of, I mean, trial and error with what, which one would you have, you know, as your resource, time versus highly skilled people or the the already people and then you need, you know, have time, extra time to upskill themselves. Yeah, yeah, of course it's it's, we are all

on short of time. I would, I would put it in this way that when you're gaining more efficiency, efficiency, for example, using AI, using the newest technology, or for example, uh, doing things 20% more efficiently, let's put it this way. Uh, you could use that more 20 20% that you gain, not doing more of the same stuff but using that 20% of upgrading your skills and for reflection and thinking.

Thanks a lot, there is so, actually, I have a couple of questions and I believe there's questions in the audience, but now we need to unfortunately move on in the program. So thanks a lot, Tommy Petti. Uh, and, um,

Jonas Jonas, uh, for the great presentation and uh uh let's keep big applause.

Thank you

Thank.

All right. Now we have gotten uh

views from the Netherlands.

Finland, but in an international context. So please use the opportunity to check the playbook in English, but, uh, then it's time to move to Sweden and uh very, very interesting

project that has been uh ongoing for a while already and uh has gotten into the even final results in some new views, even to the future to be taken. So let's give big uploads for, uh

Petra, uh

Svenson Kleisner, yeah, and even a killed court.

Um, right, OK, great to be here, uh, as Kelly said, and I've been actually meeting Kela on stage, a lot recently in Sweden. We're here to talk about the results from ProI called generative AI from threat to opportunity, and the results are now also published on a website.

which will, you will get a link to later on in the presentation. And this project was initiated to uh uh um explore how AI affects the business models of architects and technical consultants, and I should also say it's a strategic innovation project initiated by the Swedish

uh strategic Innovation Program, Smart business environment.

is that, uh, one more important thing is that we also

A sustainability, as also a core part of the project. So driving, you know, the developing AI and looking how AI can drive new business models. It also has to support and facilitate the green transition.

And this project was planned about 2 years ago when a generative AI was just starting to take off, so it was really a lack of business models for our architects and technical consultants and not so much research either. So how would we go about this? We need to work more exploringly, and we did that in a series of workshops together with 30 companies representing about half of the Swedish uh technical engineering and architectural

consulting industry. Um, and we also accept from innovating business models orating business models will also delve into how to go from the existing business models to the new business models.

Um, so, a business model, it is so much more than a revenue model so just so we're on the same page, it's about the value proposition we have, and it's also about how we, uh, capture value, uh, calculate value and generate value and uh we developed about 20 or I dated 20 business models within this project. And they had two things in common. The first was the

automation of cognitive work, which is a storing, um, processing and using information, the kind of things we do every day, as you know, we talked a lot about it here, but they were also data driven where collection, processing, and analyzing of data is the basis for decisions for execution, and for follow-up. Um, yep. Uh, and also, as we have discussed on this conference.

quality data is at the core of everything.

Yes, there was, we were actually very excited that finally there will be, you know, change in the tradition in, in the business models in our industry. We've been working with the same business model for ages, and we saw the great potential with AI and we also saw that, you know, there was a hypothesis if you develop new skills and new capabilities, probably you know you have new business opportunities. But we wanted to understand because, you know, digital development in our sector has happened over the last 40 years and uh

how this actually process has impacted the development of new technical skills and new technical capabilities. And what kind of, you know, effect it had also on the business opportunities and also if it had any impact on developing our business capabilities. So we developed a very simple model, uh, we did the map, you divided this digital development in the sector in 6 different steps, and, uh, starting from, you know, the analog, that's where I started with pen and paper.

and then going over with the digital, when the digital tools we actually exchange the pen and paper to a mouse and computer and a screen, but we continue to work in silos, but thankfully the, the, the digital development continued and that enabled us also to work in a different way. BEA today also enables us that we, we work uh integrated across, you know, with different disciplines and also to invite other disciplines into the process. Uh, but it also required standardization that we need to standardize the

data and the way that we work. Uh, nowadays we have also the parametric design that helps us, uh, you know, uh, do different kinds of analysis and do data-driven decisions in the process. Very good examples are actually sustainability analysis that can help also drive the good sustainable decisions uh in the design. Everybody's working now at testing AI. Most, mostly it is about, you know, testing these, improving what we already do today, make it more efficient and to

analyze, and of course, um, uh, to create and simulate, but the great thing is the next step is the AI driven. But the importance and the interesting thing was also how this development over time has opened up to new markets and also the potential to drive the business model, and yet we're still work in the same old business, but we, we get paid by hour or percentage or fixed price. But if we start from the, the, those that we work mostly today. This, this is the sort of the project

service market. We know who the client is. It's most often still the property developer. And the key resources are, of course, the professional skills, but we, we call the second one, the integrated delivery market, where actually these digital solutions are the key resource, and that is where there are also new people coming in, uh, into our market and delivering this digital solution to support our work. Our clients are not there anymore, you know, just uh, just the developer. It can be also anybody across the value cha

cha in or it can be a competitor, but the, the great thing is the next step would actually AI enables and opens up for, and that is this data market. That means that the data is a key resource and the client can be anybody. We don't need to even know who it is. It can be from a completely different sector from the other part of the world. So this is something that uh is now also published, um, as I said, it's a simple tool. One could do it in a different way. We wish to develop this, but anybody can go in and look at this, you know, look at the techn

ical capabilities that one has already compared to actual also this potential offerings and see where they are, uh, on, on this, on these steps.

Um, but of course, in the future, we've also concluded that clients will not pay a premium price for something that they can, you know, get generate faster, cheaper, and that's OK.

right. Uh, so, with each step in digitalization, the potential for quality and for um oh, sorry, uh, for pocision, increases, uh, and at the same time the effort to perform tasks decreases, and this has major implications for our business model, as many of you have already started to talk about today because we go from humans that produce value to machines that produces value and deliverables.

And in Sweden, we use the time-based hourly business models, so we charge by the hour, uh, and we charge for the human work but not for the machine's work and machines cost. We have hardware, we have software, we have tokens, all those kinds of things competence costs money that we can't charge for and at the same time we can charge for much less hours. So the model collapses. Uh, and as the AI tools become more and more skills

more and more of the things that we do lose this value because AI can do it.

Yeah, cheaper, uh, automated completely better than us. Uh, but at the same time, there are actually things that AI cannot do, and those things will remain valuable or even increase in value. And these are, for instance, some human capabilities that are unique for us so far or or a log into the future that we can sort of see at the moment. And here we have uh the uh intent.

uh that is connected to a strategic understanding of where you want to go. It is to actually think out, things that no one has thought before, not just a statistical blur of everything else that happened lateral thinking, but it's also judgment, and it's also having a contextual understanding to be think outside of the box, and of course it's looking each other into the eyes because we are not machine

s so it's everything that has to do with leadership uh organization, building relations, negotiations leading processes, those kind of things.

Um

now I'm trying to

it's not going very well.

No, OK, and another major finding in the project is that we need to work with more than one business model, and that business models will evolve over time. So, at the moment, a lot of us are trying to uh get the efficiency gains from AI and we can do that with a fixed price. If we really early and we do it quicker than the others, but then the industry will catch up. Uh, another strategic direction is to be uh

much better in quality and precision, may even be so predictive that we can work with outcome-based business models where we get a kickback from the result.

But

also quality and precision are increasing because of AI, so it's also becoming a commodity, something that's losing value. Therefore, we think it's our utmost importance to also plan ahead for the future to build knowledge uh build unique data sets that can be valuable that we can base our future business models upon.

Uh, and we, within this models developed within the project, we could see about 4 directions that architects and engineering consultants might take or could take the first one we call it's the super consultant, which is where the industry is at today. I would say we use AI to deliver better, faster, uh, it's incremental transformation within existing processes. Then we have those that boldly try to look at

new values in other parts of the values chain, throwing out their tentacles into a very early stages or uh going more into construction or operations, for instance. Thirdly, uh, we have the tech sharks, uh, which are uh developing proprietary um AI tools. We've seen a lot of it here today to create new businesses and new business models, and finally we have the datahampstead that hoard

s data to create insights-driven businesses.

And I'm going to very briefly, very, very briefly talk about two models that were developed within the project. The first one we called tailor-made. It's a platform for home buyers where they can make advanced adjustments to the apartments they're going to buy before they move in and also visualize with their furniture would look like in this apartments. And the revenue streams come from the residential developers that buy this app because they want to

sell better from the drawing table while they're still planning the building and also decrease the risk that the home buyers opt out last minute because they had already moved in. Uh, and I would say all of the business models had a data strategy and were built on data. I'm showing this one called The Great Place to Live because, uh, it actually builds on data insights. That's where the revenue comes from. So, uh,

it is a platform that calculates um the social sustainability score for a city called the GPL Great Pays to Live score, and it allows for cities to uh compare to each other, and it also suggests improvements for attractivity and social sustainability. Um, and, uh, clients that contribute with data because it's data driven, they can actually get a

a discount uh if they contribute with the data or even get it for free.

Yes, and of course we had a lot of fun in developing these business models and ideas and especially working with people that are very creative, and you can say it's really, it's easy to just think, you know, lateral outside the box and develop new things. But the main thing is, how do we go from these ideas into implementation and how do we transform a very, very traditional old fashioned business model into a new business model, and the opportunities are huge. It's not one business model.

it's many. There's a lot of research already about how digital development in our industry affects companies and how what you should do. They have, you know, handbooks and books you can buy off the shelf, uh, what like with tips. Uh, but there's also emerging research on how AI impacts companies, and one of the things which is really key is that, uh, the top management, executive team, CEO has to be uh deeply involved, and

it requires a lot of effort from the companies. It also impacts the organization and of course the technical skills, the culture, and, uh, as Rebecca Ungstrom's PhD also states is that this is a continuous development that because the AAI is really developing as a hockey stick. That means that also it the companies need to adapt continuously. This will generate shocks both internal and external.

The roles will be new. We'll have new colleagues as we've already heard yesterday and today, but also the role relationship would change over time. So this requires a huge effort, and we should not underestimate. Now we have published all the um all the tools that we have used, uh, all the results. We did a very good, uh, um, analysis literature, you know, a study in the beginning, we interviewed some really specialists and we have published everything that on our website, the AIusiness guide,

Anybody can use it. Uh, we have also not only published the, the business models, but also looked into this transition and gave really tips on which tools one can use to, to navigate, you know, how you go from 11 step to the other. Also for different size of, of, of, uh, companies. So anybody can really go in and uh we have the, the website is in Swedish. You know, you can also easily translate it into English, but fully English version with all the diagrams and so on is published

as a PDF. So you're very welcome to come and visit it.

Thank you.

Hm

Mhm

We did good on time. We're just 20 minutes above. Yeah, thanks a lot for interesting.

presentation and new

outputs from the

project that has been running, uh, maybe I can start with question and people can raise their hands if you have some, but um what is the sentiment of the people today and 2 years ago if you compare, you have been running.

like workshops and uh how people entered and how they are feeling today because you kind of cover half of the treaties industry. Yeah, I think everyone in the project developed a sense of audiency in the beginning it was like, yeah, it's not going to affect our businesses so much, but in the end, they were really, really, uh, we have to get started and we have to do this now, but also I'd say an excitement because there's so many possibilities, so it's really

both a crisis and as you said, opening this an opportunity.

There is

at least one in the middle

if anyone wants to go ahead. Yeah, thank you. I really enjoyed your presentation and thank you so much for the great explanation. Everything was perfect. So my own experience in uh applying AI in a very detailed use case in a very new, you know, uh organization that tried to apply AI for the first time. It was that the problem with data is

people in within organization, never see the data as a product. And my view is until we have that kind of purpose of people to see the data that we are collecting now, any data that we like inserting and just putting some numbers, it's going to be used in future. We are going to nowhere. So we need those people to have that kind of mindset and mentality to see to these numbers, to these texts, free text, as

a real, you know, product that we are creating for the future. We cannot apply those kind of AI strategy. So do you think that how we could like promote this kind of data as a product within people.

Thank you. How do you want to answer that? Yeah, I think that's one of the things that I forgot to say about what companies need to do. Uh, we identify that this first step is you need to do a data strategy.

And again, this is really a top management issue, but not all companies are the same, so you need to start from your own company to look into what kind of data do you have, but also understand what the client wants and what the client needs. Uh, so it's, it's a two-way process, and I think that with time people will understand that data is the key and especially from the sustainability side, you know, this is what we do today. We enable, uh, what we do tomorrow. So I think, I don't think it's a problem people understand that the data is the

key. It's just what should they do with data and also for especially for architects, we are still want in this bubble creativity is the thing that we actually work with, but AI will push us away from that, and then we need to work really with data to, uh to multiply our knowledge, but I think in another really important issue that has sort of been touched upon but not really discussed here today. It's the importance to work together because we need to aggregate big data sets, small companies

might not have that, and we might need data that we don't sit on ourselves like an architect might need data from operations, for instance. So another sort of insight from the project is that the ecosystem will need to work much more closely. We hadn't time to touch upon that, but I think that's important as well.

Indeed, uh, a lot of questions probably would be coming, but we need to unfortunately move on in the program. So let's give the big applause for Ivanan, Petro for great presentation. Thank you very much.

Then moving on, uh, to the

I would say academia perspective of the, of the session today, but

with a very strong connection to the business and uh some very positive news, what I've even heard. So let's give warm applause for, uh, the professor Pia Somun and Dr. Oscuarra from University of Tampa.

Good morning. Good morning.

It's happy to be here. It's the 2nd time to be in this conference and uh I, I have really enjoyed our, our stay here.

And um my name is Pia Somonen. I'm associate professor in Tampare University. I'm also work in a private sector in a company called Kraund.

It's a design facility management, uh, property management company. I work as a, uh, a development director there. So I have a two-step and a private sector and 11 food in a, in a university life, but I'm also a vice president in the CIB uh, we are supporting this conference.

And we, I have a colleague here also, please, I'm I'm Oscar and I'm post-doctoral research fellow in the, in the unit, units of struction Management and economics and but my background is in information systems science. So I know something about the the economics and something about the technology and something about the construction and the middleman a between these two, these three areas basically, so in that way it's very interesting to work with the OSU.

OK, you can see very messy, uh, process. Uh, we saw that uh already yesterday, uh, in a one presentation and uh it describes uh the challenges that we have in the construction.

All the data is fragmented in a different platforms, so different databases. And unfortunately, PDFs. We love EDFs, you know, we do everything in PDFs.

Is this uh something what we want to promote in the future, just uh producing BDFs and changing BDFs? No, it's something what we need to change in the future.

And uh it's very important because my dream is that one day we have a, a handover and we have all the data of the materials, equipments, everything what we have in the building in a smart data pack.

Somebody says that's OK, it's already there. We have digital twin now, those are not working.

We'd have to do something in a different way. Or what do you think Oscar? Yes, and when we're looking at this picture, it's so simplified form of actual reality of our subsupply chain. And how, how, how on earth we implement AIHs in this kind of a complexity. We have siloed systems, we have legacy systems, we have all of this installed base, how to embed AI into this system. This is our key research challenge you know projects at the moment.

Yes, and we know that we waste of time and doing work, uh, uh, digging, uh, information, and we waste time in uh uh construction site, uh, just, uh, looking for different uh uh products and equipments, uh, only 20% of uh the contracts workers' time is effective.

It's something what we need to change. And for example, in Finland we spent €4 million per year, just the quantity uh calculation.

But we have a beam

Why we do that? It's a, we just calculate, uh, we have a 3D model and then we print it out in 2D and then we start to calculate again.

We lose all data what we have. This is not very wise to do. Yes, we need to do? Yeah, basically we have all the data and the IC models somewhere we are building PD PDFs, out of this, this IFC models, but uh I think that this data hamsters, they don't like, like static IFC files. They don't like, like PDS, but they, but the, what they like is I think knowledge graphs, databases, that, that's what they, that that that is what data hams is like.

And I think the what to focus on data quality and IFC quality if there's no clear payback of the high quality design data. But if we connect high quality design data with AI I think we can achieve amazing things.

And we have had a project in Talotech in the 2030. It's a consortium in Finland and there are 15 MEP companies and two universities working together. And we have worked in this uh subject for

23 years already. And uh we noticed that there are some actions what we need to do.

The first, the fixed the beam

and it means that uh

what question? Do you know how many objects we have in uh design, in uh MEP design, who knows?

450,000 objects.

It means that uh we need to have all this data in standardized form.

and then comes the people

Is it in a standardized form?

Not very often. We need to do something for that to get the standard Tata because I have learned from our colleague from a TBT lab that uh AI is not

angel dust

It's not doing everything

It means that it, it needs a standardized data, data needs to be preprocessed in order for the convex window to be used effectively.

Then we need a smart database is. Definitely. And uh uh not digital twin. It's a smart databases and uh what I see in the future is that uh the database is, is fragmented.

as we know already, uh, every company has their own database, but it means that we need AI to work together work between the databases. We had a 3rd 1.

It was, uh, yes, then we are ready to integrate AI.

to our work

and to have a new kind of uh data products, products and uh if we have a product that, then we can have a data product.

And uh we have done 20 months work to get a big project, to start to work with that the first slide, the picture.

and uh to understand how can we uh have a very efficient supply chain management.

and uh finally we got the funding, uh, €20 million for re shirts and collaboration with the companies. And we have a, you can see the ecosystem is quite big. Uh, and, uh, we have some partners also in the universities in uh abroad and also some AI AI companies working together with us. And what we want to do, we want to uh create a

at least 100 AI agents.

which, which help us to deliver data in this supply chains management.

And of course, they're not just the the AI. We need to study processes. We need to study how the people work.

how it's known, and how it's in the future. If we have a database uh um supply chains or AI pay supply chains.

And also working together uh AI deliver over uh construction industry, and also uh uh information management.

It's a collaboration and also collaboration with the companies.

And uh in this project, we have a, a company from Design, Ground, a company from construction, Thera, and also, uh, uh, product manufacturer Koya Schiller.

So we want to cover the whole supply chain in that way, get a realistic way of working.

And uh the good thing is that uh uh we need to also educate the future talents. And in this project, we will have a 3 doctoral students. The work is in this uh subject because we need also human skills. We have heard before also presentations, and I, I think we have some of our doctoral students here, could you stand up?

All right, you are a future talent.

I hope next year we have all 13 here listening to this you're the stars of our field, but no pressure Yes, and uh we're still looking for a couple of, I think, uh, 3 or 4. Still, if you're interested in the book. Yes, and uh then I leave it to uh the next slide to Os school telling example how we start to work in this AI champion project.

Uh well, one practical example here is that the quantity takeoff just like Pierre described, it's 400 million so alone in, in a, in a, in, in Finland and because there's a high potential impact of automating quantity takeoff. There's also a considerable amount of hype and growing number of different AI demos, uh, I think many of you have seen LinkedIn where people use cloud and draw quantities directly from the the IFC model.

Have you seen it? Have you seen the demos? They are quite convincing, I think. You can use cloudarstant tapia that into the static IFC file and draw quantities out of it. That's by using beam beam to excel clouds skills, for example. But I, I think that this so-called vanilla lala language models approach they still face like problems with accuracy and consistency and explainability, uh, uh, for example, if the amount of quantity changes quantity is different in each cure. Is it because of the skills?

uh, the prompt? Is it because of the data or is it just because of the randomness of the last language model itself. There needs to be some kind of a consistence when building this without that we cannot take this solutions to, to the, to the production. And I would like to see solutions where we have IFC model and we convert that into link building data format in the knowledge graph for, for data hamsters and then then connect large language models. And then the day dies in a usable format all across the

downstream of the, of the supply chain.

And one key hypothesis that I have my background is in the information systems science, and I know something about the digital infrastructure, and I think that the digital infrastructure in our field, uh, is, is always going to be imperfect. The beam models are not going to be perfect because they are humans involved, product data, it will always contain some amount of gaps. Uh, there are different actors using different systems, use all the data images of the telega systems and the Axel

and digital infrastructure in our supply chain. Our work is project-based, uh, same data's being handled by different stakeholders at different stages, and that's why I think the deterministic automation is, it's impossible to achieve in-organizational project-based setting. And then, and some decrease in some degree of incompleteness is uh basically unavoidable. And the islands of Alma and is 30 years from, from, uh, when Hannus Hannos built this nice illus

t ration I I think we can make these islands larger when doing standardization, for example, we cannot get rid of this, completely get rid of this, uh, this islands because the the store infrastructure by definition, it's open, involving and, and channels.

And one, key hypothesis about what is the role of AI agents and all of this is that uh I think that we must come up with the minimum level of standardization, for example, what is the minimum level of standardization in the IOC file. What is the minimum level of standardization in the product data so that the data can be enriched all the way in the in the supply chain with, with AI agents. For example, if you have a product data that is being standardized like digital product passport

that is upcoming in Europe. We can maybe automate, uh, environmental reporting, but we need more technical data. We want to automate, uh, procurement, and even, even if, if you want to even optimize procurement agents.

And I think the key role of AI to here is that they act as translators and mediators of information where something is not perfect. AI can help. Uh, when filling gaps in that standardization and interprets incomplete information and so on. This is the key role of AI agents, and I think this hypothesis hasn't been tested in the information systems field. And I, I'm not that AI AIC as well, of course.

And at the end of our, at the end of our presentation, I want to show you briefly a key trends that are affecting our field. Um

and, and, and I think it's really interesting that intelligence itself, it basically becoming a a commodity, and we are more moving closer to the edge computing, that the AI capabilities we now have in the cloud in a couple of years we can run them locally in our mobile phone. What does this, what does it mean? Uh, when the AI can solve any basic task better than a human and in basically it's almost free.

One, what practical example is coding, like a code itself. It's also becoming a commodity. There's this software development cycles that were like months or years, just just last year, now they are becoming like weeks or even even hours or days, and that's the code is becoming a commodity and intelligence become is becoming a commodity, and that's, I have, I think has some pretty interesting implications when it,

when it, when we are thinking about, thinking about our legacy systems and our, our installed base and, and the digital infrastructure. Uh, but when it comes to AI adoption, I think the main bottleneck is not long with the technology itself. It's the inertia of a field. That's why we need multidisciplinary research in AR champion as well. We need to study the processes, existing processes and radical business process reengineering and how to renew those processes. We need to, uh, study in

10 s ive s we, we need to introduce, uh, we need to use institutional theories to understand the complexities that are not technical. Uh, in the left image here that the red area describes the amount of automation that can be already uh achieved in different fields, and the blue area describes the theoretical maximum of the automa in different fields. You can see that the architecture and architecture and

engineering field, uh 8 85% of the task can be automated. We can discuss about that. Let's not go into the details, but the, the basic idea is quite clear. We are just in the beginning of this automated, automation in different fields. And on the right, right side, you can see the amount of open positions for software developers is going up. But we still hear from the news that biggest technology companies like Meta and Amazo and O

Air, they are laying off of the developers by thousands, but they are they're going somewhere.

But I think where they are going they are feeling that blue area.

also in the construction industry because it's becoming economically feasible to build software and implement AI.

And as a summary, yes, a summary, it's a very important focus also, like I said, people

not just the processes, uh, not just the data, not just the AI altogether. So in that way, we can uh change uh the construction industry and industrialized that.

Yeah, and the real challenge is, uh, it's basically the ID business alignment challenge. We have, we have a technological capabilities that are constantly going up, and we have business existing business processes, how to align these two that, that requires research about the workflows of details of the workflows and the data governance issues and uh thinking about new operating models, uh, but, but we also need to prioritize this real use cases with companies because there's a, we can

imagine thousands of different use cases for for for AI, but what is actually what we need to do immediately, but what is something we need to do next year or 10 or 10 years from this day onward. And I think that when AI agents, when they're becoming a part of our digital infrastructure that is a huge research issue basically this or presentation is also called research because we cannot do this alone. uh, and, and this requires real understanding and research

- ba s ed approach. And, and quite close uh industry collaboration as well in order to understand what's the role of AI agency now digital infrastructure.

Thank you very much. And you can find a couple of links, uh, the, the, the reports and then finished, but however, we are AI you can translate those and also the uh uh website of AI Champion and uh this uh put it in a linked in uh follow the AI champion, the getting more information if you have a mindset and you want to work with us

talk to me, talk to me immediately. We have PSC positions open. Thank you.

Thank you Bian Osko. Um, we are a bit, uh, behind the schedule, but if there is some quick question, uh, on the, on the audience, we can take it.

take it now on the end of the session. Otherwise, I believe you will be around.

Yes, maybe during the lunch also you can come and discuss with us. Thanks a lot for the good example for collaboration and uh pick up lots of theos.

OK.

Then do the final presentation of this session and coming from the national level.

step by step through collaboration in different countries to very practical examples of data and uh let's give warm applause for Pavlina Nicolova from Ignite.

Thank you

Hello everyone. My name is Pavlina. I'm practice leader at TechNITE for those who don't know, Ignite, Ignite is a content management platform for data governance, secure collaboration, and

AI optimization. So today I'm going to talk about the challenge that most of the AC companies are facing. Often projects are treated as a one-off effort rather than part of a learning system. They have, they live during the project life cycle, and they die somewhere in the archive. So that makes us learning from past projects and gaining those that knowledge makes it a big challenge.

So today we'll be talking about how can we transform this data into a living knowledge.

So a couple of years ago we've done a report to see how much our customers, um

data, how much data do they need and how that changes throughout the years. So you see a very steady growth here and what we discovered is that for 5 years their their needs increased 8 times. And you say COVID, yes, of course, COVID was part of the reasoning, but we also see some other drivers leading, leading to that massive increase. So we see

uh the more and more data intense processes, so we use uh more and more bigger files like uh Reality capture files federatedI models, digital twins, etc. As you know, those files are large. We see more and more cloud collaboration, so AC companies moving from file servers in the office to the cloud in order to gain the benefits of having the access uh from those files from everywhere, from the construction

sites, etc. but also collaborating on those files in a live environment and when we are at compliance and retention on top of that storage that you see, things get really complicated. In the UK now we have the new Building Safety Act. So in the new building Safety Act, it says for specific types of buildings, companies need to retain the data for 30 years, 30 years, they need to collect and retain this data

and have easy access to it as well.

So, on every project, we generate enormous amounts of data and files, and this documents they capture um critical decisions, lessons learned, and technical expertise. To get it together they represent the company's accumulated experience, but most companies struggle to reuse this knowledge, and one of the main reasons for that is fragmentation.

So the diagram represents one of like the majority of the AC companies are tech stack, or at least Systems. So the knowledge lives in the middle, right? And we have, um, different silos of different informations in number of systems, so we use CRMs to track proposals and client relationships. We use estimating platforms for costs and takeoffs we use project management uh systems to keep the drawing

s um reference files, submittals, and track the progress of the construction and then we have the shared files where most of the work in progress stage documents leave, and that is usually live data with multiple versions, and when you add emails as well, where we keep our communication and many attachments, as we know, things get very, very complicated, and every system, any one of those systems contains

valuable information and knowledge is created in every single system. But again, almost, almost always is not organized in a way that we can reuse that data.

And what is the cost of fragmentation and data silos. So when the knowledge is tapped, is trapped in this silos. It's not just an IT headache. It's a margin killer. So teams are spending significant time searching for the latest version of the documents searching for the bin files and just for the right information. But also, we know about the rework issue based on the outdated files.

So an industry study showed that 5% of project costs, go to rework or mistakes.

So imagine 100 million projects, $100 million or your project, 5 million of that cost goes to mistakes, not materials, not labor, but mistakes. And about 80% of those mistakes

are due to mis misplaced information or poor communication. And perhaps one of the most important cost is not only money, but the knowledge, right? We, um, we lose the knowledge, and once the project is finished, almost never goes to the next team in terms of the lessons learned. So what we see as a trend in the AEC sector is that companies

are looking to solve that in two ways. One is data consolidation and the other one is

organizing the data that they already have.

So when it comes to data consolidation, we talk a lot about integrations, and probability of solutions. So when you're choo choosing a solution to be your centralized data. Think about your tech stack that you already have and how the solution integrates, how the data will flow between those systems, and a very interesting point was made was made in the previous presentation. We talk about integrations now, but in a few, like in the new

in the near future, this might be agents. We may have agents and say, here is your ACC license. Here's your delux license. Go find me the information that I need and summarize it or reuse it for this project as well. So that's a very interesting point that I'm looking forward to see that, but currently we talk about integrations.

So few ways we can start organizing the data as we know, construction files are most often unstructured files like PDFs, drawings, email attachments, etc. So one way to start organizing this data is by using tags or metadata using classification and also permission permissioning models.

And when we apply that structure, then we convert the, um, the, the

the basic data to a living knowledge. So let's look at the metadata.

Metadata is one of the most powerful tools for organizing construction knowledge. Yeah, instead of uh relying on file file names or folder structures, metadata can surface the information that we need, um, where, wherever it is. It doesn't matter now how the, what is the, the file type, but it's more important what is within the file, whether that is a PDFDWT or rabbit file. This allows teams to search by Pro characteristic rather than guessing

file names

Classification. So whilst metadata adds context to the project level, classification adds structure at the document level, and some intelligent platforms nowadays can automatically identify the type of the document that you're uploading, whether there is a drawing, whether there is an invoice, financial document contract, etc. so

I don't know, I do not expect you going through thousands of documents and manually tagging them. OK, this is a drawing. This is uh an invoice and this is a submitter, right? So platforms can now automate metadata and classification. Now, now that we have, once that we have this in place, then AI can search more easily and can identify the information through the data set.

Project folders become knowledge libraries.

And when it comes to permission Inc and security is very often overlooked, right, and it's not very straightforward when you move data from one system to another, so you always have to think about security and how your data is protected. We know that construction projects involve many stakeholders. You share information internally, externally, all the time, so you have to have control on who has access to your data at what point? And again, what is the

late s t version Who touched it? Who changed what. And since Ste and contractual contractual data, financial data needs to be kept safe and controlled.

So this is how um construction knowledge lifecycle can look and

each, each one of these steps is organized knowledge base, and this is how we can uh convert our data to knowledge bases, but also I want to touch on the state of fraud or redundant outdated, and trivial data. What do we do with the duplicated files? What do we do with outdated files and documents that nobody touched in 10 years. So the good news is that software solutions or some of them can do that for you

They cannot identify where do you have outdated data. Where do you have duplications and can help you clear the data up before you apply AI AI on top of it. The bad news though is that you have to maintain it, right? It's not a one-time uh exercise. You have to keep monitoring for this duplications and outdated data. Otherwise, the AI will get confused.

So structured project data, uh, captures and organizes insights from every project. This creates a cycle where teams work faster, make smart, smarter decisions and continuously grow institutional knowledge.

In AI works on structured and organized data. When we have metadata and classification, and AI can provide meaningful insights for us. It can summarize contracts. It can help us at the tender stage. We've heard lots of use cases, and we see that. I have many conversations on the last two days as well here about the pre-construction use case, and we see companies building a golden copy library, for example, with proposals that

have been successful in the past. So when you have data, the data centralized, then as soon as you receive a new RFP, then you can go and ask, OK, so bring me similar projects that we've done, uh, in the past and which one of them, uh, like which proposals have been successful in order to win this project, and this is just one example, but having the data centralized and organized.

uh help us win more work.

And when we talk about AI and I think it's very important to um

mention and to emphasize that it's better to bring AI into your data rather than taking your data out in order to use AI because otherwise we go back to the fragmentation problem, right? If we use 1A for estimation, 1A for contract analysis, and we take the out the data out for every single step, then we go back to fragmentation. So ideally you need to bring the AI to your data. First, to keep it se

cu re Second, to learn, um, through the ears based on past projects, etc. but we also avoid what we call shadow IT because people we go out and they will use AI if you as a company or as a manager do not provide them the solutions in sight the company within the company. So we see that a lot and ideally if you have the power to do so, bring the AI to your data. That's why we also see so many

internal um developments, uh, we've seen many presentations, but in general people, companies tend to develop in-house solutions because they don't want to share their data externally or because they have a bespoke use case that they want to build on.

And one last thing, so when you think about implementing AI. We think about 3 main principles. It has to be practical, so we don't want and we don't expect people to completely change their workflows. And of course getting to the stage to analyze the existing core flows. Yesterday there was one very interesting presentation. Um, they mentioned they had 6 different workflows for one process.

So sometimes this stage on its own it's great for improving and um

improving the process in general, but we should make it easy for the people who are using it day to day. We don't want to create new, very complicated processes and changes. It should be purposeful so data.

uh should be organized and the knowledge should be reused, but also start with the use case that you have don't just implement AI for the sake of having AI, and it needs to be private as we, as we talk. Data should be within your data environment. It shouldn't live for every single step of the process. And that's it.

Thank you

Thank you. Uh,

thank you for very practical, uh, examples and a good, good insights, uh, any questions from the audience for

Paulina

There is at least one in the, in the middle.

Hi thanks for the talk. So you mentioned bringing AI to your data, not the other way around, so I was wondering how local is your AAI? Do you actually like also run it on European services or is the AI still running on American servers and the data is still in around, Bawe still going there.

the second part of the question, sorry. I was wondering where your AI is running.

But you mentioned it is you use, you want to bring AI to your data, so where is the AI you use running?

So you either choose the platform that you can store all of your data and the platform itself runs an AI on top of your data or you build one your own, your own like in-house solution if you want to keep the data in-house.

Thanks

Any other hands up.

not then let's thank Palina and the uploads for

good practical examples

Thanks a lot for joining the session number 8, now it's then time to move on on the launch, but hopefully you enjoyed the journey from national level to very concrete tips how to get started with your data management. Have a good lunch, everyone. See you soon after

a good break. Bye

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The eighth session of the AI in AEC 2026 conference, titled "Sustainable Business Models," brought together industry leaders, researchers, and innovators to explore AI's transformative role in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC). Bart Brink introduced the Netherlands' AI for housing program, which leverages AI to address housing challenges through value cases, mindset frameworks, and ecosystem collaboration. He also highlighted the Build by AI platform, which fosters innovation and federated data sharing across stakeholders.

Petra Svensson Gleisner and Ivana Kildsgaard shared insights from Sweden's Strategic Innovation Program, Smart Built Environment, focusing on generative AI's impact on business models and sustainability. They showcased initiatives like Trafficverket's AI tender, which rewards AI-driven savings, and platforms such as Tailor Made, enabling homebuyers to customize apartments, and the Great Place to Live score, a social sustainability metric for cities.

In Finland, Piia Sormunen and Osku Torro unveiled the AI Champion project, a €20 million initiative to develop AI agents for supply chain management and industrialize construction processes. Complementing this, the Finnish AI Playbook, presented by Tommi Arola, Pieti Marjavaara, and Joonas Lehtovaara, offers practical guidance for integrating AI into workflows, emphasizing data governance, risk management, and ethical considerations. Pavlina Nikolova from Ignite underscored the importance of metadata and classification in organizing construction data, enabling AI to deliver actionable insights and streamline operations.

Speakers emphasized the need for structured data, federated sharing, and scalable solutions to overcome fragmentation and inefficiencies in the AEC sector. They explored diverse business models, including outcome-based approaches, data-driven insights, and AI-enhanced workflows. The session highlighted the importance of aligning technology with business processes, fostering a culture of innovation, and preparing for the twin transitions of sustainability and technological advancement. By leveraging tools like the EU's Digital Product Passport and AI-driven platforms, the industry is poised to unlock new efficiencies and opportunities while addressing pressing societal challenges.

Speakers

BB

Bart Brink

-

TKI Bouw en Techniek

IK

Ivana Kildsgaard

-

Tengbom

JL

Joonas Lehtovaara

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

KV

Kalle Valkama

-

Tyréns

OT

Osku Torro

-

Tampere University

PN

Pavlina Nikolova

-

Egnyte

PS

Petra Svensson Gleisner

-

IHOP

PM

Pieti Marjavaara

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

PS

Piia Sormunen

-

Tampere University

TA

Tommi Arola

-

Building information foundation RTS sr

================================================================================
SESSION 12: Session 9: Conceptual Design
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

OK, uh, I think it's still morning, so good morning everyone.

and uh welcome back.

Uh, my name is Sergei von Bach. um CEO from BST Architects.

and also uh one of the

supporting organization member.

Uh, we are about to begin a series of presentations exploring how artificial intelligence is reshaping architectural design, planning, and construction workflows.

Its stock brings a new unique perspective on how AI can support early stage decision making

improve efficiency and open new creative possibilities.

Our first, uh, speaker is uh Dylan Richman.

uh, from Bentley Systems, uh, uh, he's a research engineer specializing in AI and optimization for engineering design. He is the author of 5 patent applications.

uh, in this field. Today, he will show us how special priors can guide conceptual site planning and support more informed early stage design. Please welcome Dylan Richman.

OK

Hello everyone. My name is Dylan Wichman. I'm a research engineer at Bentley Systems. Today, I'm presenting predictive design as an alternative to generative design, which is a term I'm sure, uh, many of you are familiar with. So to demonstrate predictive design where're specifically going to look at, uh, conceptual site design and building placement.

But before we get into that, let's talk a bit about generative models. Generative AI has been around for decades, but the recent explosion from of large language models from companies like OpenAI and Anthropic has started to dramatically shift the focus of AI researcher towards these generative approaches.

And it's not just text, we also have image generation models like you could see here where you can create photorealistic images just from simple text prompts.

So this momentum has naturally led people to ask what can we do in our domains with these generative models.

Researchers have started started to answer this question and we've seen generative models being applied to uh floor plan layout, topology optimization and uh site design uh just to name a few.

And many of these models have genuinely impressive results, but once we start to think about how these would actually fit into design workflows, some fundamental issues start to surface.

The first is a role shift. So when a generative workflow, the designer goes from leading the design process to becoming an evaluator. It's a bit like pulling a slot machine. You give the model your context, pull the lever, and you hope the output is usable. If it's not, you pull it again.

Second is constraint satisfaction. Real design problems, as I'm sure many of you know, have many complex and often overlapping constraints and it's very difficult to encode these constraints and feed them into the generative models.

Lastly is search space collapse. Design problems have rich, diverse search spaces, and when we use generative models, we are collapsing these search spaces into individual designs.

So instead of increasing what the designer can consider were actually narrowing it.

So we started to ask the question, how can we give the designer the benefits of predictive design while still allowing them to be in the front seat of the design process and that's where predictive design comes in.

So instead of asking the model to hand us an answer, we're asking it to give us the what the landscape of good answers look like. So say we have a building footprint that we're trying to place in a parcel boundary, and we have an access point at the top.

In a generative approach, the model would probably place the building for you and maybe give you multiple other locations, and then you would be left to actually pick the the location that you best see as fit.

In uh predictive design, we instead give the engineer a feasibility map.

So this is the output from a model that's basically showing the engineer where the most likely spots a building should be placed based on designs that it has seen in the past.

So to build a model that can learn something like this, we obviously need a lot of data.

Specifically, we need a big data set of real world sites. So we first had to define what a site actually is. In our case, we're looking at commercial or industrial parcels that have at least one building, uh, placed on them and may have road access points.

We source uh parcel data from 31 counties across 10 US states, um, and got road and building information from OpenStreetMap.

Uh, the total data set was 21.7 million parcels, um, but after filtering for usable sites we're left with about 575,000.

So how do we go from raw geospatial data to something we can actually feed a machine learning model.

We first identify these relevant commercial and industrial parcels.

extract the parcel boundary from report all.

and get the building footprint and access points from OpenStreetMap and then apply a normalization process which basically allows this to be fed into a machine learning model.

For the model itself, we chose Perceiver IO, which is an architecture introduced by Google DeepMind in 2021. It's a transformer-based architecture that is designed to work with varying modalities, making it perfect for this type of problem.

So we take our raw inputs and then we feed them into an encoder which turns these inputs into tokens that the model can then read. The model processes these tokens and then outputs the feasibility map.

So similar to how LLM's tokenize words. We needed a way to tokenize our geometric inputs, and an interesting problem we encountered was figuring out how to do this.

So points are pretty easy. They have an X and Y coordinate, so they easily map to a fixed link token, but when it comes to polygons, it's a bit more difficult because polygons can have any number of sides.

So our solution is to decompose the polygon into its individual line segments. And since each of these segments consist of two points. They then naturally map onto fixed length tokens just like our point geometries.

So to put our results in a perspective we needed to have a few comparison models.

Uh, the first is a centroid model, which just predicts to place the building in the center of the parcel.

The second is what we call a uniform feasible model. This basically takes all of the locations that the building fits in the parcel and gives them a uniform value. So in this case you can see the ground truth X is actually slightly outside of this region because the building was slightly outside of the parcel geometry.

The last is a UNE model, which is a very common image to image machine learning model.

OK, so let's see how these models compared on a few metrics.

The first metric we looked at is called top constraint. So this basically takes the highest probable location and sees if the building is contained in the parcel or if it's not contained in the parcel. So obviously we want this to be higher. The random feasibility model gets this trivially because it only considers a valid locations. The centroid model leads this, which makes sense because if you place a building in the center of the parcel, the od

d s that it's completely contained are fairly high.

So our model lags behind in this metric, but it doesn't quite tell the whole story. So let's look at the, the next metric, which is ground truth Pixel rank. So this is measuring the ground truth value and seeing how well the or how high the model uh predicts that the, the building should go there.

So it's a test of accuracy of how well the model works, and you can see our model, uh, easily beats all the others in this metric.

The last metric is specificity. So if the model um basically predicts to put the building everywhere, that's not very informative, so we would like the model to um actually pick a specific location and be more specific. So in this case a lower value corresponds to a higher specificity. So in this example on the left, the output is more specific than the one on the right.

And again, uh, our model leads in this metric.

OK, so now let's take a look at what um these maps actually look like side by side. So this is the site we were just looking at. Uh, we can see that the centroid models picking the center, the uniform feasible is predicting this box of feasible locations and then the UNET doesn't do a very great job. It's basically predicting in the center, but it's kind of spread out.

Our model's output, as you will notice, uh, is the best out of all of them. It's accurately identifies where the building was located, um, and is a highly specific output

This next site is pretty interesting because of the way the building is oriented. It can only be placed in the, um, like very thin parts of the like thin center of the site. Um, and the easiest way to see this is by looking at the uniform feasible output.

Again, the you know uh UNEP model doesn't do a great job, and then you can see our model while it does prefer the opposite side of the parcel to place the building actually does a pretty good job, um, identifying all of these um valid locations and ranks them fairly highly.

And we see a uh pretty uh similar behavior with this side as well.

Uh, in this site, there are actually 4 access points on the right side, uh, which in our data set was indicative of a parking lot being there, so the model was able to look at that and figure out that the building should go on the opposite side of the parking lot.

This last site um has the most freedom, degrees of freedom to place the building, um, and you will see again the UNE model doesn't do a great job, um, and our model has identified this center column as the most likely uh place to um place the building and it captures the ground truth location.

And it also has this, uh, notch on the right-hand side, um, which is basically saying, you know, if we're going to put the building off center, it should probably be uh vertically um centered.

OK, so another useful way to look at um this model's output is to watch how the heat map changes as we rotate the building.

Um, so right now we have an access point on the bottom right and uh we're currently predicting to place the building, uh, in the top center.

And then as I start to rotate this building, you'll see how the heat map evolves and once we um have this building uh vertically the model's able to figure out that it should be placed on the left side and not block that access point because we're probably going to put a parking lot, um.

uh on the access point side.

and we can see this in another site. This one's kind of interesting. You'll notice a

notch in the top left of the prediction, um, and this is something the model learned on its own. Basically you don't put a building right in front of your access point and most, um, most, most of the time because you don't want to block the, you know, road that's going to be coming from there.

And we can see again as we start to rotate the building, how the heat map evolves, and it still respects that, um, that rule of not um

placing the building in front of that access point.

OK, so stepping back from the demos, the model works fairly well. It produces smooth, interpretable feasibility maps, and it outperforms the baselines that we tested it against. Um, you'll also notice the current inputs are intentionally minimal, um, we're only considering the parcel geometry and building footprint geometry, um, but we do plan on incorporating more information like topography and setback information to

make more informed uh outputs. But that's kind of the

key, um, driver of predictive design is that we don't need this model to learn every rule like we do in generative design because we're working with another model that knows everything, and that model is the engineer. It's the designer.

So to wrap up, we started this talk by looking at what generative models have learned from text and images and it turns out we can also learn from sites, um, in this case, we trained a model not in a generative way, but in this predictive way um to help try to keep the designer in the driver's seat, basically just to give them more information, um, that they can use, um.

and blasting is that these generative models have a lot of value in many cases, but the key idea of this talk is to basically say like let's not just be looking at uh these generative approaches. Maybe let's expand the types of ways that we are using AI to try to help designers and engineers.

So that's the end of my talk. Uh, thank you.

Thank you, Joan. Um

do we have any questions here?

Thank you, very great and inspiring presentation. I have a question because now you're learning the probabilistic distribution of one object in a one parcel. I work in a in an interior space and you know that I can see the potential that if you have multi objects into one space, can you

how does this probability map can be visualized in terms of like multi objects, meaning then, you know, it would be very interesting case study I think. Yeah, so that's one challenge when, with these types of with using like this type of method is that um you have to visualize it in a sequential manner manner, which is very similar to how engineers do the designs themselves, you know, you're placing one object at a time. Um, so

I can that, um, instance, you would probably want the other objects, you know, to be fed as input into the model. So then um as you place every object, uh it can update its prediction based on the previous placements, that makes sense.

Yeah, yeah

And I think we had another one there.

in the middle

Uh, thank you for the presentation. Uh, have you tried to incorporate zoning requirements or geotechnical constraint to the model. So not yet, um, but that is something that um would be like the obvious next step, especially, uh, like also like you said like topography as well, um

and that's why we intentionally chose this perceiver IO architecture because it allows us to input basically any modality we want to. So with zoning requirements, you know, it could be a zoning polygon, uh, and whatnot, um, so I will say like as you add more data like that you need um more data in your data set, but that's the nice thing is, you know, we have millions of sites around the world and with satellites we can increase the data set to match that input

complexity

Thank you

Bye.

OK, thank you. Thank you.

Uh, and our next speaker is Kubbila signed letter, um

he has an architectural background with a master's degree in computational design.

Currently, he serves as a design technology leader at Trinity and

uh

it develops and implements advanced tools that enhance efficiency across workflows.

Please welcome Kublain.

OK

Uh

Good morning. Uh, I'm Kubbilai. I'm a design tech team lead in neutrality, uh, let me briefly talk about our company. We are Reality. We are based in Turkey. We have more than 80+ architects and engineers, and we mostly have partnership with US-based architecture and engineering companies. We are becoming their outsource team and mostly work on

projects that have multi-store. We are working projects in retail, banking, and etc. And we have delivered more than 3200 projects completed in the last year only. So we are uh

designing and developing projects in a really fast-paced environment.

And one of the challenges we have is creating estimations for proposals uh

it was mostly senior dependent knowledge. We were asking experienced employees in our company to how many hours would it take to develop that CD set for that specific brand. And it varies from who we are who we are asking. And we also having

yeah, it's a lot spending lots of time in our databases to find similar projects in the past that we have done. So that is why we developed our estimate. It is an internal tool that we developed at captures it has the previous data that we have and it gives you

uh basic estimation about how many hours would it uh required for developer project.

So what inputs it uses after every delivery we are collecting data about the project. We have Project metadata. We have project type, we have project here. It is a system that we defined to determine what the

uh level of uh capability required for that project area. What was it deliverables? What sheets had been requested. What our disciplines involved? What are the outcomes, how many hours were predicted at the first, how many hours we tracked, and we have also

large quantitative data as well, such as North and experience of the designers.

And when we have the project databases like that, we have that input and then once we uh

have a new project proposal request. We added that high level information and our estimate gives us uh estimated hour. It's confidence levels, how many projects that they have that AI think it is similar to in the past. What are the risks of having that estimation based on the uh designer notes previously and what were the similar projects that we delivered uh in the past.

So how it works in the project database we have qualitative and quantitative data. And quantitative information we have numeric ones such as area realizer how many story does the building have? What are the sheet counts, and we have lots of categorical data. What was the bionic type client? What was the template level that we have delivered and what are the sheet types that we are asked to develop. And we have

qualitative information, designer notes about the experience.

It can be some uh those notes help us to normalize uh the realized hour actually at the first. Those designer notes can be about IAS pens 2 more hours just for additional scopes. It can be something like that and based on those notes, we use a lot of models to normalize the realize our.

And when a new project arrives, we use Catbus model to since it's really works really good on categorical data.

and AI makes the initial estimation, and for the new project estimation, we also ask project managers to enter a note about the new proposal request and at the end our estimate gives us the final estimation.

So, uh, it's been almost 4 months since we implemented our workflow and our results proposal preparation time was reduced a lot, and even if our senior employees on, uh, out of office. We just still gives the proposal really fast and

estimation become more consistent across all of the organization and discussions shifted from intuition to evidence. That is the most important results we get.

So how it was possible, uh, what enabled our estimate is, it is, as you can imagine, it is not a novel approach in terms of the technology that we used. It is a

basic AM models that we are using, but what makes it worse presenting, I believe, is, uh, the data, the way we approach the data we have. We don't have

data as a stored place but we are trying to treat our data as a asset we have and uh our estimate is only one of the examples that we have in our minds to develop further because once you have all of those experiences, light and structured in a way that you can use in every situation, but a lot more is also possible.

And uh what we centralize, we have people, we have skills, we have their day counts, the PTOs and everything. We have projects, groups and their outcomes. We have uh work plans, we have tracking our time and we are using some text to track our time, how many hours we over time, how many hours we do on the sco changes and uh revisions and etc.

And we have internal systems that were we govern all of those data.

and uh

so what else are possible in there? We are planning to develop a capacity optimizer we receive as I mentioned, we are working on a really fast-paced environments and we have to organize our capacity in a really fast. Also, we can implement some early warning and alert system before the deadline arrives because most of the time our deadline, uh, they are asking our proposals and delivered time is next week, and we have to be really

careful about the delivery time. And we can also, we are planning to

uh, once we have all all of those data, we can implement easily more. AI didn't workflows and uh we can centralized company knowledge base and all of those knowledge base can be credible.

and uh

that is, I would like to broaden the uh perspective in here from the RT estimate broader situation and in this room, we are mostly tech leaders, innovation managers, and etc. In here, uh, just is an example of what we can do as an design tech leader once we have to take the initiative of changing the way organizations actually operate. We ask every designer to take notes. We ask every designer to track their

out more detailed. We have that sort of authority to ask people to do that. So, uh, I would really love to discuss with you all what is our role and what will be the future of the operational model of the architecture and engineering services will be and how, because it will be us who will be shape those organizations.

and RTV is our last project. It's uh

we asked the questions, OK, we have all of those data, but what about the projects and we develop a tool, uh,

that opens each and every rabbit files, extract data as many as possible and we have a chatbot interface where you can ask all of those questions like, have you ever used that material before? Have you ever, uh, have you ever designed a bathroom smaller ban 3 square meters, let's say. All of those rooms, materials, families, all types, and etc. Everything will be stored and charitable. We, I have a demo when I prepared that

presentation, it was only an idea and it was really the early stage, but now I have a working prototype and we are aiming to sort of commercialize it. So if you're interested in, I would be happy to show you more.

And that was all from my aunt, if you have further questions, I would be happy to answer them.

Thank you

Do we have questions in the audience.

Uh, I make a lot of offers as an architect also. Last last night I made one also and um

one thing is, uh, I was wondering, uh, how, how this take account that architects, they have all their own kind of way of work and uh some uses 200 hours for one task and the other one uses 300 and even 400 hours to that desk. So how this takes account that the people are different and the speed is different. Well, most of the projects that we

are working on is on the after conceptual phase on the CD part of the projects, and we are working on multistore brands such as Starbucks and etc. So once we have the identified manual to how to design it from the conceptual part to construction documentation is a really straightforward process and we sort of expect everyone to be on the same uh timeline, let's say.

Uh, how about, uh, have you, uh,

evaluate that, uh, uh, how this uh prediction has been met in the real world, so it's the estimation correct and uh well, there are still lots of gaps. There's every project has its own surprise, but uh it increased our uh

accuracy a lot. Before that, we have lots of different estimations, but now we have AI gives us something to discuss on on the table, but we don't send directly to clients after once we have the estimation from the product, but we we have initial starting points where it shows us the similar project. It says it's risk levels and etc.

So, uh, I can say before that we have uh

it's varies a lot, but now we have a more consistent proposal estimation and accuracy is way better.

OK

Uh

how, how do you, uh, put that, uh, project information to the hospital. I, I'm a bit shamed. I, I use ExcelA. I have a, like a certain kind of numbers that I can remember that we use 0.011 hours to this task per square meter, so I know this by heart, uh, uh, we, uh, don't, we are not expecting that much accuracy actually we uh

we are expecting to end our employees to enter their hours every daily day and half an hour of accuracy and precision is enough for us to evaluate actually, and they are, uh, we are using Clickup and in there they can select tags such as I was working on QAQC or I was modeling. I was uh they can multi-selected. I was revising project and it helps us a lot to

make further steps

OK, thanks

But I can say none of the architects were happy to uh ask enter your hours in that detail. Yeah, I, I think we, we have this kind of system that we, we try to

um divide the hours or we have to mark our hours per task, so we can keep track how long people how how long it takes to, to finish the task.

So it's, uh, we have a lot of data of that

but it's not so nice to feel that information.

People feel that they, they are, are watched.

Yeah

OK, thank you, Kubbula.

um

Thank you

Uh, our third speaker is Sija Suakkaran.

there

Uh, she's a doctoral researcher at the University of West London, where her research, uh, investigates the automation of architectural planning using artificial intelligence.

Today, she will discuss the current landscape of AI tools in architecture and present her prototype development for school building design.

Please welcome Cho.

Sutokaram

Hope hopefully I was correct with you, it was good, thank you.

Hi, I'm Cia. I, uh, like you mentioned, I am a doctoral researcher with the University of West London, and I'm also a partner and principal at a firm called Studio Emergence. Um, and I've been an architect since the last decade, more than a decade now, and I've been very industry focused since the last 10 years, and recently started into the research journey as well. So this presentation today is going to be a mix of industry and research. It's going to talk about my experiences

as an architect. What I have learned in the last decade or so, and my computational design expertise as well, because I started dabbling in computational design in 2014 when I did my master's, and ever since then its studio emergence as well. We've been working a lot with the, um, evolutionary algorithms, machine learning, and recently also LLMs, and it's been quite a journey as an architect to go from a very design-centric background to something which is more computationally driven.

Um, so in the presentation we're going to have two parts of parts to it wherein I'll be talking about some of the applications that are there that architects and designers already use in everyday practice and how they are reshaping the design agency overall, and the second part of the presentation is going to again talk about some of the applications that we've developed within the research unit and also at studio emergence, um, so the approach for the first part is

to understand that we wanted to just understand what are the applications out there that are already commercialized and are being used in the industry by architects and designers for all stages of projects life cycle, and once we had a consolidated list of 50 applications, what we did is actually ran a lot of analysis on these applications to understand where these applications generally are situated within the entire workflow. Um, so the 50

s elect ed applications were uh these which are just here segregated as per the project Lifecycle stages. We went through a lot actually initially it was a list of almost 400. We narrowed it down to 100 and then we came down to the 50 most used. Uh, here we could just at a glance see that it's quite lopsided as per the stages. It's not very equally divided when we look at 5. We've used Rebalan of work, which is Royal Institute of British Architects because that's the landscape we were working on.

but it pretty much remains the same where in the stage one is the briefing, and then we go on to concept design, going on to spatial coordination and technical and then actual construction at stage 5. so we see that stage 2 and stage 5 have a lot of applications, whereas the others are kind of underserviced when we look at the applications that are currently out there.

Um, what

sorry. Yeah. Uh, so when we started working on the construct, we wanted to understand how do we evaluate these tools because they vary by and large. It's not something that's very similar, and we couldn't really group them in one particular way and understand what works, what doesn't work, and being an architect myself, I wanted to understand what is it doing to architects in the design agency as a whole. So two aspects that we came up with to actually understand what this these tools can be evaluated over

is one is the AI logic, which is the uh underlying artificial intelligence logic of the application itself. What it captures is how intelligent and self-directed the tool is. Does it optimize complex problems? Does it learn from it, or is it a very run of the mill application just that calls itself AI. The second value that we were mapping very closely and especially with my personal interest is the architectural values, so that's called AV and that what it captures is does it actually

preserve architects' control and creativity? Does it allow the human interface within the application and how how blackboxed is this application? Does it just give you some options that you don't have any control over, or can you actually select and control certain aspects of the design output that you actually get. Um, and we come up with something which is the intersection of these two things, which is the design agency, uh, so here we feel that the design agency

has been evolving with the advent of AI, and it's kind of shifting in a way that the intersection between these two values is where the architect or designer who uses AI in everyday work is actually situated and we are just trying to evaluate what the design agency is doing as we use these applications. Um, we did a small pilot study to understand if you are rating these 50 applications on AI and ALNAV. How do we actually rate them holistic

ically So we called 10 experts to rate these applications, so of course they couldn't do the 50 applications because it's a very arduous task, but what we did is we asked them to rate 5 AI applications on a lot of values, so we did 3 AL values, 3 AV values. There was a lot of statistical analysis that we run on that and then we also asked them to rate it in our framework which was like a scoring rubric wherein there was low where the AI logic is just uh becoming like a tool that is

assistive. It's not really doing much, and when it's a low AV, then it's output are narrowly technical, and it's not really focused on the designer as such. When we go to medium, it's somewhere in the middle, and when we go to the high scoring framework, the tool automates good problems and at the same time it also explicitly supports design agency, and what we saw was the 10 experts, even though there was a

huge variation in their ranking. Ultimately when we looked at the ICC coefficient of them, which was just showing what is the differences the averages were really coming out similar, and from that particular aspect I'm not going into detail of the scoring because this is a smaller presentation, but ultimately we assign this cost to the 50 applications that we selected and now the interesting part started wherein we could actually see what these applications were doing. So here in this particular chart

if you look at the x and y axis, the x axis is the alignment with the AI logic, and the wise architectural values, and the color coding is such that it just shows different stages, projects, the life cycle stages, so the blue, dark blue one is stage 1 and the orange is stage 5, and we kind of start seeing a lot of understanding of where these tools are situated. So if you look at the lower right side quadrant where the orange tools are mostly there. That's higher AI logic

and slightly lower architectural values, and that's where the construction bits are fitting in the applications that really service manufacturing and construction.

whereas if you look at the top left quadrant, which is more of the blue tools that are situated. That's where most of the higher AV and lower AL tools are situated, which is mostly to do with conceptual design and the stage one of the tools. Uh, when we also look at the average mapping, this is the data that we get to just understand what, uh, how each project life cycle is being serviced to different industries, and all these industries are almost working parallel to each other and not concurrently and

together.

Um, we also understand by understanding this data that the design agencies is kind of shifting. I don't think it's changing a lot. It's more to do with a redistribution of the design agency overall because, as I said, the stage one, there is a kind of similar AI logic in AV, but as we go towards stage 5, which is the other end of the graph, we see that the accreal values dip quite a bit, and the eye logic really goes up. Um, similarly, when we also look at second

ary parameters like the user type and which applications are being used with what user. Architects are generally situated within the Stage 1 to 2, and contractors are typically situated within stage 5, and there is in a lot of overlapping that happens between these two.

Uh, similarly, for geographical context, a lot of this is said to be global, but when you research more, it's really uh focused on uh either Europe European context or the Northern America context. So a lot of the global aspects are being ignored when it comes to building regulations when it comes to different geographical contexts of projects. Similarly, tool development also does the same way wherein what is being commercially available and what type of design logic each of

these applications are using currently. Um, one of the major learnings from this was to see what typology is being serviced by these applications, so a lot of these applications were geared up towards residential, mixed use, and commercial application, and a lot less was to do with institutional type of application, um, we could, because of my personal experience as an architect as well. I understand why industries and institutions are lesser because there's huge hierarchical

problems and spatial adjacency issues that come in when we start designing complex spaces, so that's one of the key foundings that we also had.

Um, here again, just a summary of what are the findings for this one is the redistribution of the design agency, technological landscape has a bias wherein there is a gap in high AV and high AL, both aspects. It's mostly either one or the other, and in industry and governance we see that institutions are really underserviced and also sustainability tools are really underserviced. Uh, there are a few which are really robust, but there isn't a lot high and wide which we can use. So from this we wanted

to understand what the gap is and what is it that we could actually develop in the research unit and understand what we could work on. Uh, one of the things that we came up with was understanding institutional architecture and specifically school building design. There isn't a lot of applications that do that, and the second reason to do this again was that for school building design, there's a lot of information that we already have, especially in the UK, wherein there are schedule of accommod

ation that the Department for Education already puts up there and if you just have the number of pupils in each school, you can actually get the areas of the requirements, so program becomes easy for us to understand. There's also a lot of exemplary design options that they've already put up which we could use as a data set to compare our application tool later on because in institutional architecture again there isn't a lot of data sets available for us to compare and understand what the circulation patterns inside a school should be like. We started with something simple

I mean, again, from my personal experience, we start with adjacency matrix to understand what does adjacency matrix for a complicated design program like a school looks like, and this is one of the smaller ones, to be honest, that we worked upon a bigger school had 100 rows or more than 150 rows in when we started, it was such a conundrum to understand how do we actually solve this entire problem of adjacencies because the number of rooms in an institution and also the spatial

hierarchy of the rules is extremely rule-based. It's extremely tight, and to run that computationally, it became a big problem, so

for us this was the major challenge in understanding what do we do next. Uh, one way to look at it was to clusterize the entire project, so we clusterized programs in a way that these clusters and these arms of buildings would be separately made, and then they just come together and the computationally rules that we have and the evolutionary algorithm that we run later on works only on the clusters and not within each of those 100 spaces, and we could very successfully get it

down to say 20 clustered spaces for for a primary school of 100 pupils or so, and then it was an easier task to get them together and then internally subdivide later on. Uh, for the prototype development framework, what we did was uh develop that into two phases. The phase one was mostly about capturing the information, so capturing information from the schedule of accommodation to numerical data capturing information from the Department

for Education Outlook and Information. Uh, also planning rules, regulations, building regulations of that particular site context, so that's all coded within, and the part 3 was actually using the side boundary input and understanding how that boundary could be within the software. Phase 2 is again running evolutionary algorithms. We particularly selected evolutionary algorithms because of um uh the perrito optimal um solutions that it gives because when we were running

options with other kind of uh solutions. It was always becoming a little too complex, especially given the number of and volume of spaces that we had, um

so, uh, again, coming back to the first part wherein how is the designer involved in all of these options, so being a computational architect myself and using all these applications that are out there. One of the biggest problems I had that I didn't have a lot of authority into selecting what is it that I was making. It's usually a lot of applications just give out outputs that I was not able to kind of pick and choose. So all throughout the steps what we've done is given some kind of input for the us

er to select certain options whenever they're going, because as a designer we all have a certain um thinking and when we go into a project, we want to do certain things, so it's important to give that kind of choice as we progress through the project, so there are some typologies of plant exploration that we do so the user can actually select certain typologies that they want to put up. We could also do input parameters like the site dimension, the road orientation, uh, the orientation of the entire site, so that could also help us with

energy or simulations later on, and the setbacks at each site has. So a lot of the building regulation requirement like the heights, the overall capacity that we can actually FAR that we can actually consume in the site, so all of that was actually inputted and once we have all that information, that is just one case study that I'm going to be presenting today just two options for the same wherein we have a small site, we have regulatory offsets of the setbacks, and we have a program from the SOA that's been derived to just

make one school, so this is how just some options of the layout generation and we got a lot of options from that because this is the rule-based optimization. So we have rules that rank the um um site and the plans that are generated in certain ways and then based on the ranking you can select which one works, which one doesn't, uh, and this is the optimized layout for the CShape plan for the school. Similarly, we also, I'm just going to run a little fast because I'm

I think running out of time, but we are also having an option for the L-shape planning for the school, which again generates the same program, same site, same setbacks. We can do multiple options of plan iterrations. Um, again, the optimized layouts for the L-shape planning.

and we kind of try to understand if the same school is, uh, you know, tested against the DFE layouts that have been published by the government. How does it work? And the results come out pretty OK wherein, you know, the, the roadside is where the entry, which has been shown in the blue part, um, the, uh, the admin spaces are around it, uh, then the halls and the play areas again closer to the entry and then comes the learning spaces which are a little

further away. So whatever we wanted to select and work on, we could um, also we have been working on this in a BIM environment wherein the entire thing can be in a BIM software, so this is within Revit, so you can actually generate walls. You can generate different typologies of false. The user can select the type of windows that they want to select, select the type of walls that they want to select. So based on because I've worked in different geographical spaces, so I

know that the wall typologies also change location to location. There's a lot of difference that come in because architecture is extremely tangible, and it really differs when you move from geography to geography, so we kept it very open ended for the user to just select what they need, and work on it accordingly.

Yeah, that's, that's it from me. Thank you.

Thank you

So do we have, uh, questions in the audience?

there.

Uh hello, Andre from Hala.

I've been designing some schools, uh

early and uh

I was thinking this kind of systems could the designer like uh him, they no Sher like for example, the gymnasium or the pretty surely have an idea. It has to be at some point.

So, uh, can, can the designer intervene like, I just know that this has to be here and then they on everything, Alice. Yeah, yeah, we've kept it quite open ended at this point because there are obstacles that can be selected, and then, you know, you could face that as an obstacle, and that part will always have that thing that the design already selects, so everything else gets, you know, situated along that axis. So there is a possibility to reserve a space for a certain thing and then we could like

kind of generate the outputs around it, so that's definitely a possibility in this.

Thank you.

Yeah, uh, we also do, uh, design for schools and uh uh our, our designs never look like that. They always make a different angles and different kinds of shapes there and, uh, can, can you, uh, adjust those um

so you can get a bit more uh architectural design for that or is it more like a

a special connections at this point it's it's more like spatial connections, but we are developing, so that's the next step to it wherein you know, so different shapes of sites are already incorporated. That's something we can already do, but to get to a point where there are different spatial organizations as well, wherein you know different whatever the user wants to do, they can actually sketch a shape and then the entire building can be around that shape. So that's the research that we're currently doing as to place it along whatever shape that a sketch could.

be done, and then, you know, that whole thing goes around that ship, so we're working on that because it's already a very the way this entire thing has been made is that it's already sketch based, so the line typologies that we had, which was linear, C-shaped, so that's all sketch paste. So in a sense whatever lines that you give as a guidance can be used later on. So that's something that's been uh developed, to be honest.

And um in Finland, I think we have kind of different rules for different cities. Do you have variation in England. Yeah, it does. That is, that is a lot that that's also the problem and why a lot of institutions are not touched because residences are still similar, but when it comes to institutions, the differences are too much, but what we've done is kept the first part of it quite open ended, so you can input a lot of the requirements that you have, and then

the outputs can be slightly closer to the building regulations of that particular region, thank you.

Yeah, there's a question. Thank you for presentation. Uh, I have just a quick question from you. Do you think that generation, uh, generating hundreds of layout in a minute, risk information overloading, and how do you optimize selected wine preserving human creativity. Um, so the, the one good thing about this is that you get a rank-based output. So if you don't want to go into overload, you could just look at the 1st 10 ranks, and in case you don't like what you're seeing, you could s

i ft onto the other things. So there is a kind of because all of these options are going to be kind of optimal. It's not necessary that it's going to be fully optimal. So there is an option to look at certain things that you want based on the ranking, so it's not going to be a heavy issue for, you know, the user. So how about the human creativity. Human creativity is very much there because this is targeted as a conceptual design part. So what, what I understand is that when we

start a project and especially due to feasibility problems, manner problems, fees, or the SAT issue of iterative design and optioneering during the conceptual phase is never done to the extent that the architect wants to do. So this becomes like a part of the toolkit wherein you just see certain options in front of you. It's not necessary that you have to select, but it gives you that wide range of optioneering to then apply your creativity onto and then develop as you want to do it. So this is not an end product of what you need to make, but

it gives you the optioneering that is required in the conceptual design stage if that makes sense. Yeah, I think it helps uh architect to handle the, the information load that they have. They've got a lot of input from their teachers and principals and and they have to consider all that, you know, and at that architecture also there. Yeah, it's, it's like we do bubble diagrams, we do conceptual load

ing We want to just understand what the volumetric space looks like. So to do that initial stage of case study and just to see certain things of what the site looks like. This helps quite a bit, and it can be like a week's work can be done in like a day, and then, you know, I'm, I'm kind of making it more. It can be even quicker and generally that two weeks of time that we take from the for the first presentation can be cut down quite a bit, that it helps for that. I think this would work also in hospital design for institution

s again the same thing. OK, thank you so much. Thank you.

Uh, our next presentation comes from Finland, um, Doctor uh Maury Larsonen.

Uh, he works at Tampere University of Applied Sciences built environment and bioeconomy. His uh responsibilities are research and teaching design.

and, uh, IT solutions of construction engineering. Today he will explore how AI enhanced visualization can improve communication and design outcomes in the early phases of housing design.

Please welcome

Yes

Yes, good morning, everybody. Yes, my name is Mari Lazanen, and I'm working at Tampere University of Applied Science. And my topic was, as we said, the visualization of buildings in early states

And the problem is very common to you nowadays when we make this early stage design, you get some details, some steering from building company and then architects goes to the office and have to make quite detailed model of the building and then makes a visualization and then she or he come back to the office and so this, this is our plan and then they discuss

about it and then there could be some changes of art that go back to the office, make a new model after 2 weeks, they came back here we are, but

when there is not yet buying customer. There is not much resources, and this game cannot go very.

very many rounds, so here, our topic was that can we make those visuals as pictures by AI. Everybody knows that you can make any kind of picture, but the Greek Wes was, are they usable pictures you can make.

And uh our method was we select tools, archi archiate and set keyBD, uh, that was promod to us that this is the version that we can have real rata data from companies that it don't be shared, so it's paid version and we have workshops which housing development professionals, and then there was our team.

an architect and researchers and then we kept those those pictures and evaluate them and follow what kind of discussions there were.

The key findings. The first

thing we learn that

it's very useful still make some kind of PI model in the beginning, but it doesn't be a detailed. It's just a simple mass model.

You get the information, the building companies that this is, is uh how many blocks there may be and, and roof program that what kind of houses there will be and then also on authorities they may be saying that how many buildings there are, so make a mass model.

then take a view of where you want the picture and have a screenshot.

from Sre and keep this picture as a steering file to the AI.

Then you get picked from this project and this vertical things. So this was the first lesson.

The next lesson we learned was that uh there are always mistakes.

and they, they are not perfect, but I, I do, but

we have this disclaimer.

This pictures are made by AI, not me, it's AI and 10 you get excused.

and people could follow and and they, they said, OK. We, we can use these pictures

and

what, what happens it was data start to discuss.

and that that was the founding that it, it the picture doesn't need to be perfect to get real about and useful discuss.

So conclusions was that we think

we find a method you generate usable images to architects of the first questions if they are losing their job, no, they are not going to do that because they are

mistakes in the picture. We need high

uh professional architects say that this is good, this cannot be done, and uh but what was less, the routine modeling work. That was our target.

So we get less modeling, more design.

And uh in the next I will show some pictures by which I uh profit, I, I call make, make this conclusions.

This is what we started here in the left side is this articulate model. We loaded into the server to terrain, the roads, they exist, and then put this very simple

Masmorote

and then selective view and get this picture on the right side.

and there is this right terrain and when dislocated in the right place, there is the right kind of forest behind

It's not very glorious picture.

It's not what we have used, but this is the visual aspect.

This lights has to be sent in this seminar several months ago, and now I opened it and I look, oh, it was this picture. We, we nowadays we have much more better, better pictures already, but

go to the beginning

We don't have much skills. We start from the stero. We want to save work, so we just take this picture which is usable and just saw it.

See what's happened

and

I'm here

The, the project wasn't closed quietly. I'm here, so something could happen. Something could happen and what we do, we have this is, yeah, and then we have this planning regulations of authorities, and we give this text.

there and images and what was surprising that almost every

detail

the regulations was was can't be found from this picture.

and what kind of discussion happens. Take for example this uh

large bicycle shelter with green roofs.

Yes, there is text it's in text form there.

and everybody, OK, it's OK. We we are building buildings and we lost original nature. We have to compensate it somehow and this is normal way. It's OK.

but as soon we have this picture.

every oh, not there this one.

it is there

you start to take

Oh, it's quite large.

And the building company start to think, Oh, there is a cross. It means that there is water

The water is lying on the roof

It's smell freezing and melting several times in a year.

This roof should be there without rusting next 50 years.

How much Natuarlio is beneath to build as such a roof.

behind the middle of the forest.

This rule is to to the big cities in the center of the big cities.

Everybody understands immediately when speaks so that there's no sense at all there.

OK, this discussion continues. Agatha says, OK.

you put there

the cheapest, uh, steel profile and see to the roof and that's, that's OK, but it made me look a little bit.

not so nice.

and then hm, how about we are the countryside, we put there some kind of uh shelter which are used to the animals and there is nice roof there and so on and OK, maybe, maybe I can do so.

Then the discussion continues and they they start to think about for example, this red bricks.

If this red or not and is buried enough and same time

in the same room, there is one guy, sorry, I'm saying only he

He doesn't say a word.

but he is snapping his computer all the time. He listens to what happened

and after about 10 or 15 minutes, he raised his head, starts to steer the architect.

He steers

and then he knows it's just architist sees me, he

writes a little bit, shakes his hand to the screen doesn't say nothing.

And then says, OK, now we have discussed this. Can we go back to this roof. We have now a new plan.

This guy has

the best tools he knows best connections, he could make a new picture during the meeting. They have new version of this design during the same meeting.

not after 2 weeks, not after 3 weeks, in the same meeting they can continue the discussion.

and this

what is kind kind of change.

OK, you can have a pictures without images.

They can make, but then there is some difficulties, for example, this, oh no, not this one.

it's very difficult to AI say that how many stores there are, so they, there is only 7 floors here.

but uh mm parties, uh, mass model, it's, it helps, it, it doesn't solve the problem properly, but it helps, and nowadays you can also use that picture also that the three dimensional DXF file and give that also the steering data. So this way you get the better

better uh steering data, but here is also other mistakes.

This is like a children's games that find for errors in this picture. And maybe you have find the biggest error already.

It's here the tram

It's

just the trend we have in Tampa. It looks like that, and there is tambare Terriro rails, but this is in not in the middle.

and it doesn't disturb me at all. I'm concentrating on the polygons that there should be a classic baron and Redis because it doesn't matter, but we don't know. Can we, so to speak, to the customers.

do they think that, oh, these guys can take construct good buildings if they don't know how the trams goes.

So, but this can't be easily changed also in this picture. It's not, not a big problem.

And when you have this frame.

this, this model

then come to next next step and next next advance of AI.

Now you can go out of the box.

get new ideas, uh, generate different kind of things and still you have this frame and they are somehow the about this same project and they are reasonable.

and this is always when you go to make ideas, this is your target that go out of the books. That's the finest thing you can do.

and uh but uh

those who are most exciting that they like to go straight through out of the books.

but if you don't have the books, you are just out.

In Finland we say out as a snowman.

So we need this frame and then we can generate this ideas and now

if the constructors start to talk.

and say that this is good, this is good, yes. He may need a bigger column

He finds errors there, but then you press.

pause button in your head and

think, OK, what he really means you have make a great job. This is a nice picture. I like it. There is very many good things. Change this detail and this is the discussion we have.

and to pick up from the discussion what is good, what is bad, what what would be the next version and this way it goes very easily further. So you'll see AI can make this kind of glorious picture also, but problem is that they are not so usable.

but AI likes very much if you want to close your pictures, it wants to put pool. Bigger pool better. 2 pools better than the one. So they are not so usable those pictures and here are those other things AI likes is those class uh walls.

you have to say very clearly we don't want this kind of vote, and anyway, all those commands, they must be quite clear and we find out that this what we tried in the beginning, try to make them very clear to governments and but by this picture

you found a good uh start to find other things but you didn't have in your mind in and this means more design.

What we haven't done is, is uh so those pictures here to the uh other trees or customers that, that is not done, but uh and but if there are some problems. It's easy to change, edit the pictures, but we haven't done that in this project. We just saw the example this left original pizza is not made by us. It's

in our customers

uh building project, but we just very short.

So, uh, government.

get very usable picture where it changes to totally the image.

So

don't be saying

Remember it's AI and remember, always in this visualized pictures, sun is shining.

so be happy. Thank you.

OK, thank you,

Do we have any questions in the audience?

You ought to argue, yeah.

Yeah

Thank you for your presentation, Doctor Nason. I am also architect and I always using the AI tools to polish my render, but AI often generate a completely different image every time. Does this effect reliability? How do you ensure consistency in early stage residential design. There is no logic in AI, so, so you, you, you desperately try to find something, but it's like a

game.

You play a game and you find a good result, but you can't there, there are a lot of, but it's

you can generate several pictures. So then we need a who say that OK this but don't be saying you can so all the bad picture. There could be something customers it, but that serial you get a lot of different things and no logic. Next, next picture can be totally different from what you're supposed it will be.

Yeah. Thank you.

Yeah, we could have, like, like before, we used to do that, that we try to find with image search, certain kind of feelings or images that we can show to the customers, Is this the right feeling? Do you like this feeling?

Uh, and, and AI doesn't differ from that. No, no, I support that that project very well.

I, I'm also a boarding instructor and I made a presentation for that, and I tried to ask from AI that I want a boat that has one radar antenna, and it produced me a picture of a boat with 20 radio antennas.

and then I just don't want antenna and it has 20 more. Yeah, it always goes over, but then you have to just edit your picture. If you want more precise.

because then you have to edit it. Do you think that this images that AI generates. They are more

American, not European.

Yeah, those pools, they come from there. not need need so many polls, but, but Osars, you can have your own teaching data if you have it and when you go to the literature, they, they collect styles and from different architects or different areas, and you can keep that to the steering data. So, uh, when you take this method on the, on the normal by

you should have a certain sets you give uh to the steering data, this kind of pictures and you get them that kind of stuff out. So you can develop own steering data, own pictures, and that's solves that problem.

We also use um virtual models and um it uh it brings quite good image quality already as it is, and uh they, they brought a new future, a new AI feature that software and it added

so you can edit with AI and add something to it. And we wanted to, we, we were making a design of a church al church, and it has the right picture in the altar and uh when, when the AI edited, it changed the picture in the all around and it didn't like it did look good because it looks like there is a devil in that picture.

and there was a cheese originally, but uh

Yes, uh, in the Kino2 they ask how many has used AI and all almost every hand rise up. So this is low growing fruit. I believe that everybody of you can make this kind of pictures what we have here.

and they don't be very, very high level when they are already useful. So this is something you test it starts discussion, but it's not the end. It shouldn't be there we don't know where this where we are going because now we have this mass model and maybe we can make a little bit better model where you can get yourpache and still it doesn't need to be very detailed.

models, so it's possible that we can go further with this less modeling and more decide, as I say. We don't know. OK, thank you.

Yeah, then we move on to our final speaker in this session. Um, he, his, uh, Dr. Mikal Johannes from

ETH Zurich.

And um his research lies at the intersection of architectural design and machine learning.

and, uh, with a focus of on generative and analytical methods. Please welcome Doctor Mikhail Johannes. Thank you.

This one

OK.

Great

So, yes, uh, thank you everyone for having me here. Um, I would like to introduce myself like I'm Mikhail Janus, uh, I'm design plus plus bosstoc fellow uh from IS Zurich for a context, what is design ++, design ++ is an interdisciplinary research center at IE Zurich.

that advances AI and XR in AC that also engages with industry, um, in this project we collaborate with Halter Group, and it's subsidiary integral, um, which are focusing on the design built of commercial interiors.

So this research is basically a collaboration with industry and research center. So I'll present my work to the title AIrin uh circular fitouts which aimed to enable adaptability in the office interior by leveraging AI and competitional design.

Um, so why do we need to care about the office interiors. So as we know that work styles and needs are continuously changing, so the office planners or inter planners has to adapt as well. Um

but

these changes come at a cost. If you look at this very typical office core and cell typology.

and we see the impacts of

the greenhouse gas emission, uh, over the lifetime of its building, let's say 50 to 100 years.

um

the the ways that coming from the construction and the

frequent refurbishments are renovations of the offices, uh

of the of the of the

of this building of this interior can, can exceed the building andiso itself over time because of like for example like every 5 years it changes in 3 years, especially in the big cities like where the turnover is very quick.

Uh, so

why this happened? So, I mean, the main problem that we observed in our

uh field is that our design paradigm often focusing on the immediate needs and requirements.

Uh, leading to a large amount of waste that we generate when we need to change from one design to another after 5 or 8 years.

So this is that we need to rethink like we cannot like only design for now, but we have to see design.

as a sequence of possible future design.

So this is our main goal is actually to

a computational method that reduce this waste by planning ahead, considering multiple design options.

uh, that can be accommodate that can accommodate different requirements.

So, uh,

we can somehow save some elements that we we can reuse after to to to.

to, to adapt to the new, new, new requirements.

Um, so we developed a method that leverage this uh idea that basically offices are already modular by nature, so it's kind of like low hanging fruits for us.

Uh, so this enable us to think that uh fit out design or interior of interior design problem as a hierarchical combinator design. I mean, if you look already into the kind of school design we can somehow pack like the space as a zone and then you have space types and then you have elements inside that somehow

in nature are modular.

And how can we solve this? Yeah, conventionally and naturally we're going to do optimization like using combinatories and optimization to solve this, to sell to to kind of optimize the space planning of this interiors in a way that, OK, if you have multiple design requirements, can we fit everything into, into that layout.

Uh, but the problem is the conventional rule based so are limited to what we can formalize as an objective. I mean, actually has been highlighted in the first presentation that's quite uh

a lot to formalize. So it's restrict their ability to capture the risk design intent that we have as an architect often leading to feasible but unintended design outcome.

So what we do here is like our contribution is to kind of insert in between this optimization loop, this LM model that can reason and learning the context of design.

So our contribution is to leverage the semantic reasoning capabilities of AI agents to enable alterations of design that's being produced to align with the design intention and guided optimization toward more meaningful outcomes.

So for example, here like during the process like the sulfur given up bailout and like we let the LM to kind of reason if this makes sense or not? Is this like considered uh align with our intention or not and then give some some kind of changes. So we don't use AI kind of solving, but we use AI to kind of guiding this combinatorial search.

So this is a process results not only a more meaningful design but also allows the algorithm to explore the large cominateral space more effectively, ultimately improving how we found the solutions.

Ah, so in overview, basically this research combines comin natural design with Larkin's models to enable exploration of adaptable design usingmo components to respond to different design requirements.

So let's jump into a case study.

for a not while the

like domain or the kind of case study here focusing on the office design topology after I think at the end of the presentation you can see like this actually can be generalized into other typologies especially for hospitals, schools, industrials, uh, that have like much more complex design topology.

So, yeah, imagine that we have an empty office into your in which multiple design scenarios must be accommodated like we have the squaron cell typology with the planning grid.

and yeah, for example, we want to fit 3 design scenarios. One is general post offices, which is valid zoning.

meeting heavy scenarios where we need more meeting spaces, the work focused scenarios that we need some these areas more, so yeah, we want to say like, OK, what kind of design that can somehow adapt to these requirements.

So we represent this design requirements in

a few variables. One of them is uh how the program ratio is distributed. This is pretty straightforward actually as a designer that we usually use this as kind of a proxy to see whether it fits our requirement or not.

So

and also we represent the design requirements in the most spatial relationship. I mean, it has been so before, but we can pack like, OK, I want the zone surfaces be far away from the work surface for zones and in the mating zones to be closed as possible with my work zones. I need the lobby too, so this is kind of like something that we can formalize. We can somehow create that identity matrix and then yeah, the machine can learn and encode that easy, everything is good. Uh

but the problem is that that requirements uh are requirements that we can formalize.

uh

but there are a few things that we cannot somehow formalize. Let's say I want some kind of grouping or I want kind of like continuity between spaces that we want to have that connect this spatial structure. So

this is where the LM plays a role in enabling semantic interpretation of the spatial structure in the program.

We introduced the third requirements that allow designers to specify intentions in natural language, which then LM queries to guide the common natural optimization process.

So this is how it looks basically the end of the optimization is to find a partition and scheme that minimize interventions that while we adapt from one design to another. So basically we want to see how much permanent elements that we can put in place already, so we don't need to remove

while we change that in the future.

So let's let differ into how we

do this, uh, so we learn from this LM driven combinator optimization that use graph representation of the floor plan as the main bridging between this partial configurations, which is how we arrange the spaces and the programmatic assignment, which is how we assign a function to it. So this separation is actually the key of this method.

So let's see how the we create this one. So for the partial configuration we thereflop uh configurable floor plan

graph in which the precision of the partition can be assigned.

can be specified, uh, guided by the planning grid.

and the interspace is by assigning this partition thespa basically subdivided into spatial units and then the anti-fluorine graph is generated. This is basically the

black notes and edges that you see in the center.

and then

the another model is basically how we assign program to it like the programmatic zones are assigned using a hybrid approach that combines constraint programming, uh, with the LMAI agent inference. So leveraging the graph representation and semantic reasoning, uh, the system assigned zones to the floor plan grab, uh, based on the different requirements that we have added to to it. So this requires are expressed in two forms from is basically the one that we can formalize that goes into sulf

ur into satis uh constraint programming software that we can solve with a certainty that it's going to solve it and then the design context or design intention is solved by the LM model itself.

Um, so the divine objective functions that guide this optimization problem. We have a few of them. One is the power of it, the program is

how it respects the rules that we already gave to them like I want the zone to be far away and this like this, so there are like hundreds of this actually coming to the to the sulfur, uh, and then the second one is quite like the

the morphology of the spaces like how complex the space is, so it can be usable. So these are something that we also want to, to

uh to see as an objective

Um, so yeah, altogether the optimization combines configuring configurational search and programmatic assignment to find the best configuration that can be adapted from one program to another, so the results you see on the left side, sorry, is it left or right or whatever, uh, like it's like

you see that the the the the black part, the the gray partition is basically something that we can somehow preserve during the adaptation of the design, while the programmatic change happened, we can remove and add few uh

modular

uh modular elements

So the primary results shows that the incorporating AI agent or intervention expand the parietal fronts of the combination combinatorral search.

uh, enabling the system to discover a wider range of physifiable but meaningful design solutions.

Ah, but the real question is whether this uh multi scenario optimization approach can really reduce impact and costs. So we compare this project, this method like this multi scenario optimization with the singer scar optimization, basically the top row we join optimize these three design requirements at once, and the bottom row is basically where we optimize the design one by one, so leading to different configurations.

So we calculate how much waste that you're going to generate if you go through all of the design in different pronotations and yes we reduce uh

a lot of ways, not a lot, but quite a bit of ways coming from the permanent, uh, from the drywall, but also we, we want to be a bit holistic like, OK, let's say we throw away also the the the the modular glass panels and modular solid panels that we're going to use, uh, this basically, um

also being reduced a bit and also intuitively

we also reduce the amount of work that you need to adapt those spaces, which is then increasing the turnover, uh, sorry, decreasing the turn off cost and time during this project.

So

so ultimately the goal is like to enable circularity of its feet outs. Basically we want to reduce the impact of this frequently changing needs of an office while having something that is more adaptable while preserving some static elements in it.

Um, then yeah, we try to to be to do good with our planet. We just not try to do it faster and better and more efficient, but we want to have a more strategic choice of what elements that we can keep, what elements that we can somehow think ahead and invest into that.

So thank you and with your help, we'd be happy to connect further to have in-depth discussion letter, uh, another slide, uh

also I invite you to learn more about Design lulu at at Zurich. Uh, we are a very vibrant community there. So if you happen to go to Switzerland, please, uh, in May we're going to have another great symposium in Switzerland, Future of constructions. So yeah, we invite you to come to Switzerland, uh, the early bird registration and this week, so yeah, please have a look. So thank you.

Thank you. Do we have questions the audience.

not

Yeah, uh, I think that uh

that is, uh, for, for an architect, it's uh difficult to take so many disciplines to to the consideration when you're designing, so this will help to optimize more uh more things that a human can can optimize by themselves. Uh, have you, have you tested this in in real world

yet, or is it has been just in the lab, yeah, so that's why we collaborate with ah design built companies. So they are providing real case study for us like they already have like 1000 square meters of offices, case studies that they want to kind of like showing proposal. So basically the idea is to to use this as a as a tool to to create a giant brief. So I give a failure to the to the client like OK, this is the investment they can make if you have this decision

Basically you can adapt, uh, uh, with this there are like modular elements that you need to invest, invest into, into the, into the design, uh, the problem is like you don't want to have moderate ailments everywhere because it's very expensive. So this process is basically to find a best strategic way to invest into that modular elements, so it's kind of also the selling like kind of like a way to kind of give failure to

to to to the elements that you are like producing or you are suggesting to the client.

uh by having, you know, like 10 years or 20 years investment, uh, anticipation.

So yeah, that's something that we are currently working on and then yeah, I think in the next 34 months you're going to see the papers come out from that, so yeah, I will keep you posted. OK, uh, do you, do you see in the future that uh EU will require this kind of process to, to get the building permits or

and the policy side, it's hard to say because I think circularity right now is getting more enforced like now you have to have building logbooks. I think in EU level to, to, to

to start with the project. We also need when you this uh this not destroy them all as a building, you have to do a report like this assembly report. So I think more and more regulatory harness will be enforced, uh, but also I think for us from our research in that's why like more constraint we have to put that constraint into our system. So that's why, you know, the parables that we have to think is getting larger and larger. I don't think we're going

to have ability to compare all of them. So this is actually where we see the failure of AI. It's not to make your productivity faster or to make your hour less, but it's basically to make our ability, the ability for us to comprehend complex decision variables, uh, into, into our table and

allow us to make decisions. I agree.

OK, thank you, thank you so much. Thank you, everybody

So I think next, uh, uh, next we have lunch out there and

and we can have more discussion about these topics then.

Thank you

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

At AI in AEC 2026, "Session 9: Conceptual Design" brought together experts to explore AI's transformative role in architecture. Sergej von Bagh, CEO of BST Architects, opened the session by emphasizing AI's potential to reshape design, planning, and construction workflows. Dylan Wichman from Bentley Systems introduced predictive design as an alternative to generative design, addressing challenges like role shift, constraint satisfaction, and search space collapse. Using Perceiver IO, he demonstrated feasibility maps for site planning, analyzing a dataset of 575,000 parcels. Examples included parking lot placement and thin center site designs. Generative AI applications such as floor plan layout, topology optimization, and site design were also discussed.

Kubilay Şahinler from Traility presented ARKE Estimate, a tool powered by CatBoost models and normalized qualitative data using LLMs to predict project hours. He emphasized treating data as an organizational asset and shared plans for capacity optimization and early warning systems. Seeja Sudhakaran, a doctoral researcher at the University of West London, showcased her school design prototype, which uses adjacency matrix clustering and evolutionary algorithms to optimize layouts. She highlighted gaps in AI tools for institutional architecture and demonstrated BIM integration for conceptual design, allowing user-defined typologies and spatial adjacencies.

Mauri Laasonen from Tampere University of Applied Sciences explored AI visualization for housing design, showing how simple mass models can generate usable images for early-stage discussions. He noted that AI-generated images, while imperfect, effectively facilitate dialogue among stakeholders. A disclaimer for AI-generated visuals was recommended to address errors. Mikael Johanes from ETH Zurich presented his research on circular fit-outs for office interiors, combining graph representation for spatial configurations with large language models to reduce waste and enable modular adaptability. His approach reduced drywall waste and turnover costs while preserving modular elements for future adaptability.

The session underscored AI's ability to enhance efficiency, creativity, and sustainability in architecture. Discussions ranged from predictive design and data-driven estimation to visualization and modular adaptability, showcasing diverse applications of AI in the field. Each speaker highlighted innovative methods to address complex design challenges, demonstrating AI's growing role in shaping the future of architecture.

Speakers

DW

Dylan Wichman

-

Bentley Systems

KŞ

Kubilay Şahinler

-

Trelity

ML

Mauri Laasonen

-

Tampere University of Applied Sciences

MJ

Mikhael Johanes

-

ETH Zurich

SS

Seeja Sudhakaran

-

University of West London

SV

Sergej von Bagh

-

BST-Arkkitehdit

================================================================================
SESSION 13: Session 10: Computational Design
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

And uh of course, like in the other sessions I will be handling the questions in the end of the presentations.

And remember, if you, uh,

come up with a question during the, uh,

presentation, you can write those down in the event up. And of course, if you already have one, you can write those there.

Uh

I will keep this introduction part short because I want to of course have the all the time to our presentations.

but uh quickly highlight what's happening in this session. We are diving, uh

into the world of computational design, and, uh, basically we are seeing how AI is affecting the

workflows

in uh uh in all the engineering disciplines basically. And, and, um

for what I have like from my experience, now AI has basically

gave, gave, uh, give us uh like power to actually start doing computational design and and like design automation in a more wider perspective and, and we can, and more people are easily adopting new ways of working because of like white coding and, and you can go to this uh states to you can actually test stuff quickly like the minimum viable products that you usually need to build.

and, and pilot. You can now do them really, really quickly. But, uh, also, of course, the whole industry, uh, wants to do something that the legacy tools might restrict. So of course, now with computational design and, and AI we are uh those restrictions are, uh, moving away.

All right, but uh

I think we should start straight into the presentation, so our first presenter, please welcome uh she show Cha.

from Germany, uh, give a warm welcome to

All right.

Hello

Um

uh

so, uh, today the topic I'm going to discuss about is, uh, uh, data-driven uh, data-driven design through a feedback-driven, um, semantic layer. So it's actually very simple, just like um what we're talking about, they're all data and they are all knowledge that can be optimized.

Um, so, uh, as, uh, uh, architecture, uh, architect, uh, background, uh, sometimes, uh, we're like not sure like what is data, but actually data is something very simple. It is just something that is given, the things that is there. So what we are going to do with it is totally up to us and um it is um not something like very dangerous or or something that um you're like an IT department will really uh be

be mad about uh it's something that we should work with and also figure out a way to work with.

And if data always right and uh no data can be uh incomplete, misleading, or simply wrong, but making decisions based on data is still better than uh doing pure gas.

And when we are talking about data-driven design, we're actually uh talking about the question of why, and as architect, I'm very used to the idea of uh parametric design which is to use computer to um make some calculations to do the design, but it is actually dealing with the problem of how and without this uh like understanding of why uh sometimes we're just optimized too early and we're probably making the uh like going in the wrong direction.

so uh

so being a data-driven means that asking the right question and be uh like open to ask questions, why we are doing this, and it used to feel like very hard because collecting such information can be overwhelming for architects and engineers because we spent all our time to try to complete stuff and uh the the billable hours is all we, what we can sell and if we cannot really uh spend that time uh to do um real work instead of like saying I'm doing research and find

ing out why we're doing this space and why this space is useful for anybody or um this kind of question, it just feels like, like very dangerous and it also sometimes uh feel like um

not the right question to ask. But to be honest, I got this domain, uh, data-driven uh AEC.com two years ago for $12. So that's something like, uh we are not talking about even 2 years ago, and now something has changed.

And this is a research uh recently done by Anthropic that um architecture and engineering has a huge exposure to AI like even uh to a similar extent of compu computer science, math, or legal, but uh like the red circle means that we only started uh very little and um there's still a lot of potential that we can do with this.

and uh maybe you already know that some software developers already setting up 24/7 agents that can do their job, uh, all the time, and this is also happening for uh architecture engineering and uh so this is an example that um we have set up uh agents that can catch drawing errors before they get built, and you can upload, upload your drawing set, like complete uh PDF set or something um that is like completely like dirty data or

then you can also upload your customized uh checklist like whatever format it is, and then this agent will run for hours and hours and until it catch um maybe other potential errors in your drawings. So like, uh, not all the like results are correct, but um it is still like another pair of eyes that's not a human can actually achieve to this kind of uh checking and it it's like a companion that is on your side and it is doing their job

and as a human we are doing our job, which is trying to control the big direction of the design, and that's also what um like architects are uh like like trained to do to be more um uh like not to say aesthetic, but to make the uh space has purpose, but a lot of time uh when we are trying to do the design, we are so down to the uh details and already lost this sense of uh space and why we're doing this. So agents are there to help us to dealing

deal with um

to deal with this repetitive tasks and so uh what we can do is to control the big direction.

and the data is already there. Uh, I don't think that, uh, we have to have all the data like ready and clean because that that is not possible in reality, uh, like in reality, what we're doing is just trying to get shit done and there's not really a time for us to um like um to clean all the, all the stuff and all this thing we created, they are data like um like the drawings, Excel sheets and uh

specifications. Everything we create is data. The only thing that is missing is the driven part, like how are we going to use that and how are we going to make uh decisions or values out of it.

And we already know that generation is not enough. Like each time you generate, uh, it's hard to control the quality and uh but what we have been doing as an architect is actually just generation, like each time we got a a proposal, we create a thing uh that can probably match the client's um uh idea and then we generate again for next project and generate again for next project. So what we have been doing already this generation of part, but uh we can do

better with AI because uh that's not something that uh I would say like take a lot of creative creativity to put together a drawing set, like what we are trained or all this like um like artists doing is that they are making uh like a consistent story which AI cannot do and um so

uh but how are we like as a junior architect, it is really hard to get this kind of training because all the day it's consumed by preparing those drawing sets or um

so what we can do is actually to um help the um like juniors to spend more time to think like in a bigger picture and that's that way that they can use utilize AI better like instead of saying that uh AI is going to replace the junior's job. Why don't we make the er the current juniors are doing the senior's job, and I think that's something that uh we could consider as a company that um like leverage the human labor in a better

way.

and AI is all about optimization. So once we've got this input and uh input data and output output data, you can run whatever kind of algorithm to get there. So the uh algorithm is not a problem. There are hundreds of like AI can generate like tons of algorithms to just to uh point you to there. But the thing is that we have to decide what we want to optimize for. Uh, is it, uh, to complete the drawing or is it

to um

uh optimize for uh residents well-being or is it uh some other goals. So like as um architects we always have a lot of goals in our mind, but it is hard to uh articulate that our um to make it something clear, but it is important to be clear about what we're trying to optimize

And this is an example that we did um 2021, that actually we found out that uh built environment has a more effect on health than the number of hospitals. So for example, the urban space of how many cafes and how many parks in the city can better predict the health status of the residents that the number of hospitals, but we're trying to pour all the money to build more hospitals. And how about to make our urban space better. So that's something that data can help us to

uh to look at and that's why I like research is important and uh looking at those data used to be uh difficult and not everybody can have access to it, but I think it is getting like more and more easy and so that we can make decisions that I can actually um

mm like optimize for what we're actually looking for.

So, uh, beyond technical efficiency, uh, we can already optimize for occupant well-being, operational performance, or cross-project learning and also safety and equity.

And also like each um each building can teach the next one.

With designing words and those are the things that um

those are the things that uh AI can do like very well, like when users say that I want to welcome um lobby, then we can use AI to map map it to some um like objective metrics and those metrics can be quantitative. So suddenly we have all these measures that uh architects used to say it is feeling or it is something like uh uh uh like not very quantifiable into something that can actually measured. And once we have those measured, we can

op t im ize for it

and a feedback-driven semantic layer is to capture those uh feedback in the loop and then um collect uh what we're doing and then centralize it, leverage it, and, um, utter it again just like product development.

and the cost of starting from zero is high, a lot of our um project management time is lost in this process and also rework will um uh like those errors shouldn't, shouldn't be like handled by human and then uh start uh for example, if we are trying to design a hospital, uh, there will also be like uh simple things like wayfinding and um

that should, should have been solved, but it, it, it actually needs to be solved and um we're still losing those hours. And then um

like after the building is built, most of the uh data that um uh or how the building is being used are lost, and they are never utilized in in real life, but those are actually very, very valuable data that can help architects to design better buildings in the uh like over and over again.

And these are like why the like it used to work, it didn't, uh, it didn't work before. It is because that we have very static oncology ontologies in the building and it feels like very technical, but actually what we want is very simple, like everybody can talk about their buildings and everybody know that like how, how it feels to be in a building. Why don't we just, um, like try to

make it something that humans can understand.

So that's why like AI can tolerate those messiness and translate it into a structured knowledge that can be used.

and the technical stack can also be very simple, like AI agent plus database, you can just like pipe all your current uh technologies just to make it connect to the uh agent if you can, and then uh use a database to store the information. It doesn't really have to be that, that difficult. It works for smaller organizations also.

And the accuracy problem is not that hard. Like if we consider that AI has is a layer and human is another layer, then we have better quality control than when, when we only have human.

and across the buildings uh across the life cycle of the building, we can, uh, we can accumulate those knowledge and each part will like benefit each other and um that's how like we can get a feedback-driven like improvement over time.

Yeah, and data driven is about asking questions and asking questions takes courage and but uh it sounds dangerous, but it's the only way that after a single direction road that we have been running for so long.

Uh, yeah, that's my contact information and we have also been doing research, uh, like for AI enhanced post-occupancy evaluation or uh like AI agents, so if you're interested in this kind of thing, then uh feel free to contact me.

Thank you

Thank you, Xihong, uh, very interesting presentation. So if I understood correctly, you would like to fix the problem that we always do, unique projects with unique problems and it always starts from the scratch. Uh.

is there any

questions in the audience?

Nope. So, yeah, I would like to maybe ask the easiest question like what's next on your list.

Uh, yeah, so actually what we have been uh doing is setting up this long-running agents and also a database uh for uh like a operation, maybe a few projects and then connect those agents to this database so it can always have access to your uh like project data. It doesn't have to be all the beam data but can also be like operational data or communication with your, uh, like, um, clients and then make those the knowledge that agents can be accessible like 24/7.

So it's, it's like just trying to make your uh domain knowledge to like uh connected to like what actually your building uses KR or clients care. So that's like uh kind of or like next thing on the roadmap, but um the thing that we have already been doing is also like, uh, like hostable, like on your own server, so it's, it's just smaller pieces pieces that we're trying to build together good to hear. And basically, like you said that

you are now, you have been like a junior architect and now move more into this AI stuff? Is it something that like excites you that you basically can do maybe more than you have been able to just stay on the traditional architecture.

work or are you still doing, uh, also the.

Yeah, I'm a licensed architect. Uh, I'm just trying to put myself in the shoe of like a junior architect because I feel like most of the work um at that stage, it doesn't really make sense, um, so, um, but I think that um there are a lot of ways to optimize for practice.

alright. Hey, thanks a lot, uh, Xihong and uh let's give up one more round of applause.

Thank you

And then, uh, next on the list, we have uh

advancing AI-driven automation in infrastructure design. Ramis Mohare and Dirkunzner also from Germany, but I guess it's only

uh one of you, just me, yeah, Dirk. All right, Thomas is at home listening in, uh, from the video. OK. Yeah, well, please, that's the green button. OK. So thanks a lot for having me here, uh, on the stage for the 3rd time in the 3 years, so I'm happy to um

to show you to present you some more projects of our company.

and we are going to deal with, um, AI-driven optimizations or just getting from point to point by totally using, I, I workflows.

So the agenda is just showing you 3 projects at the moment. We are working on in almost in, in Stuttgart, and so the

the first one is a tunnel Project close to Lake Constance, and yeah, it's beautiful, beautiful area. No ice anymore on the on the lake down there. So that's what we are working on, and but we don't, uh, work on the whole tunnels so we're just, um, dealing with, um, drainage pipes, uh, the drainage system. So that's the first stage of, uh, of the building of the tunnels, and next we'll come in in a few years because we have to do pre-consolidation, so that's a green area.

just pressing down the soil and you're able to build a tunnel upon of it. So it's um just as build model of the, of the drainage systems so that's a rather small task.

but not the small tasks, you can also learn pretty well, uh, different things. So that's the data we are giving. We've got the existing BIM model just from the preliminary uh state and stage and we've got the data from the constructor or from the, um, uh, fabrication models from the, from the pipes and you've got the data, uh, they've got in this bedsheet. So that's what we have to as a basis wherever you're starting off from and that we heard a lot of

um, making the data clean and how to deal with different kinds of data. That's what I'm trying to show you. By the way, we need, uh, as build models, so the, um, the backflow, uh, before the legacy workflow was just you're building that, what's on the plan and you'll get your um uh the delivery um documentation and somebody will just count it together and the government will take a green pencil and just make your, uh, some questions

and you'll get paid

So with the new BIM workflows, you have to do a

as built model with a really in, in situ, um, pipes.

and manholes and screws and everything, and then connect to the delivery documents and lots of other data and ontology data to it. Uh, and then you process it with a tool like i2 and then your, um, able to get the transparency you want to have for getting the contractor paid so you know really this stuff is out on the construction site. The problem is, uh, as long as you don't have aI model as a build model, you're not paid

So that's, uh, normally the as built model is, is just uh disappearing somewhere in the woods, and nobody really finishes up, uh, a project unless you're taking this measure and just not pay unless it's not, uh, modeled. So we normally would have taken the, um, the geometry from the um from the contractors or from the um precast, um, owners and

converted with civil city, then put it together with Rabbit, export it, use the site MD to get the attributes on it and connect to the, the documents, and then control the whole staff and deliver it. So it's at least 4 people you need for this process. This really tiny uh small process. So the idea was to skip the whole thing and just use the data we have and combine it in a way we can just get from the data to delivery of the delivery of the,

um, BI model in just one row.

remodel means uh IFC model. So that's what we did. We did, um, a lot of programming using the LLM to get the data out of the spreadsheet. It just heads to um shrink the dataase of the pipes and then that's the result and the customer can click and see if the pipes are delivered and everybody's happy. So what's our takeaway from this, um, project. It's, it's just, it's worked out. Uh, maybe the first time it wasn't really, um, the ArroyI wasn

' t wasn't that high, but we learned a lot and we can just use this workflow for other, um, um

other projects like for roots design or for HEx or in the high-rise building industry as well.

The next part, um, would be

um, another, um, building process just on the construction side, um, that's the main railway connection between France and Germany. So if you're going to go from Stuttgart to Paris, you just have to cross this bridges. Um, so our bridges are over the River Kinsick so it's a rather small river, but at least without those bridges, you won't get to Paris from Stuttgart. And the Deutsche Bahn did a lot of efforts just to build up on really nice um

beam model. But if you want to build it, it's just just digging down and zooming in, and you'll see it's on, on some parts it's more Hollywood than, than BIM, um, but at least Hollywood is also good for, uh, for presentations. Um, but the, did it get all the model tasks done, but the problem is just the 4D simulation. So we have to connect the engineers, our planners with a contractor and the engineers will

did a lot of work already and they thought our 4D simulation or concept is the best, and we just hand it over to the contractor and he'll start his excavator and build it. And the opinion on the opposite side is just we are, we know how to build it. You don't, your engineers, uh, don't have to tell us. Um, we are, we are the one, who, who knows how to build such a complex project. And how, how it's done by the process. So we have got the

um, the structured data with ontology and everything, and we tried to connect, um, to the schedule of the and tasks of the contractor. He, so he has to think first this one and this bridge and this pile and stuff, and we just tried to connect it. Normally we do it, um, with, um, BBS code. So worked out, work, work, breakdown structure code and just on, on two sides, the one side on the model, the one side on the task, which has put them together. Norm

ally it works.

um, really good, uh, and you're just matching them and you can just do start your video. So in this time, you're just discussing with a contractor since months and weeks.

but we still get 0 matches, and it's about 10,000 entides and er matches is not really a much, especially after this long time of period. Uh, we're trying to get more matches in there. So the idea was we have to talk more. Talking is uh AM-based, so we just, um, uh, set up this website with a microphone. You can just click on the microphone, um, get, um, um, plan or information about your, your bridge or your piles or whatever.

on the screen and then you can just um talk to this machine. You can just, uh, tell this machine I want to build, um, those 6 piles, um, on the stationary from 2 and maybe just from the, the, the besides from 5 m to 6 m, you can just talk to this machine and this machine is just connected to the IFC models and it just checks what, what does he mean? Is, is there a pile in this area, um, just with the structured data, and then

he just proposes, sorry, it's in German, but it's a real-life data. And we just say, should I connect those 6 piles to, to this task. And then you have got all the documentation what's meant, so it's talking and at least Jeff also the connection done. So that's what, what we think it's, it's a, um, it's a way into the future. And you're also for debugging, you can just open, uh, this, this black box and you get the SQL or new 4G um cipher

statement just to see what uh what's injected from the database into the LLM and then, um, using the reg method to, to show the data with the, um, from the database together with some text and then to make the understanding better.

And we also have got um two different LLMs. At the moment we're using Clodei, but we also have our own, um, LLM trust in our company, so we just can switch and see what which which machine will answer better.

So that's the, the results. So the clock is ticking, um, next train is, is coming in about 20 hours and you're just starting to get off the, uh, the railway tracks. You have to rebuild them. You have to, uh, do this and this and this and that, and so the excavator is running the lorry, the trucks are running, and that's the result. We, um, we have to deliver to the customer and he's really nervous, so that, so that was the first one, the start of March, but it's really nervous for the next ones.

Um, so hopefully we get this common language together, um, to connect

um, the contractor, and the planner. So our takeaways was using rack in this time and also this transcription of the inputs or just talking, talking with a any, any kind of language with the model was really, is really great and brings a really fast to a good, uh, to a good decision and a, a good outcome, um, because it's, it's just selecting from the model without any knowledge about SQL cipher or whatever.

So last one is um already built structure or just um uh structure in refurbishment. It's, yeah, it's not really looking interesting when you're looking on the road. It's one of the major highways coming in and out of Stuttgart. So there are 4 highways and that's 1, we are talking about

so you're not, um, the, the drivers don't really like you when you tell them you're going to block this road for a couple of years. And so the problem is that the main sewer of Stuttgart is just below, um, the road, and it's about 60 years old and really, really rotten and really badly damaged. And so the ways to, to build a new one besides about just to build the new one, you have to put the whole traffic on the, on the old one. And yeah, that's a

problem at the moment. So we thought about what will happen to the, to the old one.

And the idea was we had a little robot running a couple of years ago, so it's already 8 years ago we programmed this one, without cloud AI, without Chat GBT, it was just from scratch, um, doing this autonomous, um, navigation staff with a computer vision and training it for cracks in the

um, uh, in the floor just to detect if, if it's broken or not. So the idea was just to use the same thing in the, in the tunnel in the channel as well and the through as well. So we just build up a rig like I guess we've got this trousers here in the room as well. Um, but this rig and do the same kind of, um, programming, um, with the rig to acquire this data 30,000 pictures every, every run. Also 3D data

from a laser scanners and chose to try to get the um the health status of the declining health status of this, uh, building. So that's again, that's uh the tunnel itself. It's about 1000 m long, so it's 1600 of those rips to be, to be damaged. And lots of, lots of data, um, that's our Rick with all the, um, all, all the sensors on it. And so the bottom of the brick is running

with brush 2, and here we are using, um, holo, um, 11 for, um, computer vision for the inference for the cracks.

And so that's um the

videos running, video's not running. So that's the sensors on this rickets was just getting one more, one more, one more, so it was, um, getting more and more complicated and

uh now it's coming. So the other problem is you have to bring this rick down to this sewer. So it's like a satellite when everything is folding out when it's within has left the rocket, uh, so that what we imple implemented as well. You just plug it in and then, uh, it starts playing

Uh, so the, so the mission is also it's pretty costly to bring it in and you have to close the road. You have to build up all this equipment and to bring it in with some people, other people have to watch if the water level is rising and if there are too much bad gas into, uh, in the, uh, bad smell in the, in the tunnel, so it's a lot of costs and

additionally, there was no GPS down there. There's no communication like uh Van or 5G, 4G, um, you don't want to touch anything because there's lots of bacteria and stuff, uh, on the walls. So that's what we have to, to cope. Um, with, uh, while doing this, um,

this research and so that's the IS staff we implemented, so it's not the LLM, it's, uh, for the one thing, it's um

no, it's a wrong direction.

It's ICP from the lighter, so it's like a, um, it's just connects to the to the roof and it just counts the rips, passing by and the other one is computer vision. Um, so we are just, um, taking A Protex, which is, um, screws to the walls and then it can, um, do another, um, process for autometry and then we've used them both together and we get to the real position of this rig and this pos

ition is necessary, um, just for the

um, for the, uh, for the data of the PIs because when we have, when you have 30,000 pictures, you don't know where this data is collected or is damaged on the picture is really in the, in the tunnel. It's, it's useless. So that's uh that's the point we have to deal with. And the picture you have seen, it's all the simulation. We did a lot of simulation, uh, of, of grid before we, uh, really went into the tunnel. So that's the result, we're getting, uh,

video stream or a single picture stream with all the damages, um, detected.

about, yes, so 30,000 pictures, but yeah, you you can make a report about uh which of the 30,000 pictures has a damaged, but we're just trying to do, uh, um, a diagram and what has changed since the last 3 months where we have, uh, increasing damage or even more increasing damage then they can just look at those pictures. So it's not, um, just the, the finish up is not just having a nice video with, um, uh, inference, the finish is this.

um, or the, the, the, the result of all this doing is just this diagram. And then you have to look on those pictures just to be sure, um

there are, it's, it's not really, um, yeah, you don't really have to close the road up above, or if, uh, if it's necessary, we can insert some steel frames just to stabilize it. So after the first run, we already had to insert, uh, 3 steel frames. So it was worth the run and

yeah, that's um good uh complementation of, um, uh, what we heard before. It's just on input, um, to decision. Um, we have got this, this whole process and we get a report and yeah, that's like we try to do the AI-driven process, and yeah, that's, I'm really in time. Thank you, thanks a lot and hopefully you enjoyed the presentation and have some questions for me.

Right. Thank you, Dirk. That was interesting presentation. uh.

as I think we can say that like now the with AI and of course with new technology you can do something that maybe that uh highway would have been just blocked and started to work and, and with, with the new technology, we can maybe do something better and something in between, yeah, yeah, not causing too much harm for the, for the users.

you were saying on the uh

first part that you are basically what it was, I was liking the fact that you are skipping the some of the tools, uh, so you don't have to actually go into like civil treaty or or revit and you can actually produce something usable without them if you are talking about like an actual that's a goal it's it's just skipping the whole or just reshaping the whole process and just got it, getting from data to delivery. So that's, uh, that's the point. And

otherwise, our engineers are draftsmen that just opened it and change and then convert it and change it and then the next one starts the next day, so it, it takes a couple of days and then it's wrong that you stopped from again. It's, it's just a couple of pipes, so it's not really the um uh the salary isn't that high and it shouldn't be that high because it's just modeling as built model for um uh for billing.

Yeah. So basically like the fact that if you like want to speed up the process, you might even have to like not use the legacy tools and yeah, be more creative on that.

All right, do we have questions from the audience?

Yeah.

Thank you for your presentation. It's really interesting. I'm curious about the last one about your monitoring, your

uh, I'm questioned about because the cases are very specific like detecting the, the comparfi has to detect very particular cases, how you train your models and how do you evaluate what data that you are using, uh, to train the model.

Um, so we annotate the pictures ourselves, and it's roboflow, so the little rubber we did all this programming for the, um, annotation, annotating for ourselves. Now we use roboflow and it's just um

using, using the tools there and you just get the model for a yellow out, and that's really, really smooth workflow nowadays.

All right. Any other questions? I think there is none on the

Yeah

All right. Thank you, Dirk once again.

Applause for

um

All right. So next on the list we have

Christopher and Tuamo.

Kuy shaping the future of computational design with AI.

Please

give a more welcome

sip of water

something to start with. OK, thanks for having us here

and uh

we are

from Rumble and uh

myself, I'm uh working as a automason and AI development, managing and leading the

research and development in in complex and design point of view.

and, uh, Christopher

Uh my name is Christopher and I worked at Ramble as a competition time developer.

Good

So

I give a small insight. There has been excellent presentation yesterday and today and, and

what, what we are currently working on Ramble as in

uh, in generally in AI business area and, and, and then we'll go deeper to the actual

Way

presentation like in topic we had. But uh there is about 80 year old Chat GBD.

but you can see there's a person creating, prompting questions for a colleague and Golic is answering shortly. Maybe the guy is evaluating if he was hallucinating with that response or something, but, um, these two guys created fantastic Coin now we are.

roughly 20,000 strong employees, strong company.

And

something about generally we also have like any other control that company nowadays we have AI playbook. We have a strategies, policies.

We need to train people, communication is really important at the moment. What are the pros and cons utilizing AI what we are allowed to do, not to do what are the risks.

We need to understand what we are doing but those platforms.

a little bit

our company-wide solutions we have from TBD. This is the most used platform. It's uh quite multi-purpose tool for everything.

and we have, of course, co-pilot. No need to explain. I'm pretty sure everyone has used that one. It's it's a top of office applications and boosting uh usage for Excel and Word and PowerPoint and things like that.

Then we have a orriami named, sorry, my voice is a little bit cracking, but uh it's a kind of focusing for

for creating

uh good structured documents automatically and, and enabling to create templates out of them that you are able to reduce.

those good templates and it's only based on what you

kind of

what is the teaching or kind of learning material ML data photos, so it's, uh, in enabling the output by them.

And then we have also checkmate that is focusing more like NDA.

risk uh

agreements and, and things, things like that.

And

a little bit something else that I think

we haven't seen much

When we use

AI platforms, it always has uh some kind of effect, and we like to

be sustainable company in Ramble and and we actually have been following

and kind of sharing this information to any employee that it has some effect when we are using AI platforms and

this specific picture is uh from October 25.

It's uh roughly

9400 end users on that specific month.

and that is the output.

kind of what has the effect

for that. And actually, even more simplified example, this presentation that Christopher and I produce

meant that we

used

a bottle of water

because

AI is running in data center, data center needs energy.

Those uh server computers, they need cooling, cooling needs water, but roughly bottle of water is, is what we used for this presentation because we generated images and optimizing text and creating this presenter. So like we all do nowadays. So,

tomorrow, whoever is going to use the

chatty video or whatever, so be mindful, be better prompter.

Make it count every time when you use it.

And

about uh akki itself is actually started one year ago and last

AI in AEC event.

here in Helsinki, we were kind of uh id ideating that, uh, maybe we should, uh,

have some presentation next year and that was a starting point for developing this, but it was quite clear that we need to set, um,

own

in-house developed, uh, safe environment to utilitize this and, and we, we like to think that this is AI inside AEC. It's inside GAT.

It's inside rhino, rhinoceros application. It's insight

G8 means grasshopper. Just a question

Please raise your hand if you're familiar with grasshopper, so

very good. Most of the people are good.

and um

we, we saw this as a challenge because we, we have lots of somewhat rainy and, and recently graduated uh

young people that are coming to company and, and they have very limited skills in terms of parametric modeling point of view.

And one of the biggest platforms that we are using this kind of stuff is rhino, grasshopper, and, and we kind of, uh, wanted to think that

they might need some help. We have remote working east to west. There's no that uh senior colleague behind the next room that you, you are able to go and ask help, but, uh, this kind of, uh, AI assistant is much more useful just uh

quicker prompt and ask and even try to create something with that.

And

this is also harm harmonizing the way we work.

because uh it has fantastic features also just basic stuff that

kind of uh documenting the parametric model. I, I mean the coding canvas that there. It's harmonizing visually also that kind of, so it's important in, in, uh, when we are scaling things that we have a certain way of working.

but

Christopher,

take it away

All right, yes, so let's dive into what wok is here.

um

so

what is our Rammel's internal AI assistant.

uh, inside the program Rasopper, which many of you knew about the show of hands, so that's good. Um

as you know then that grasshopper is a quite a powerful tool for designers and all kinds of different doing all kinds of different tasks.

and uh but you also might know that the learning curve for grasshopper can be quite steep.

and that's what also was why Way was here created.

Yes.

So what can uh Koki do here?

The video playing, yes.

So as any other chatbots today, you can converse with it and uh and the normal.

normal chat chat mode, but you can uh get more answers tailored for computational design and r and grasshopper.

But further enhance the capabilities. We also have some actions it can do.

So by selecting which action in this case, creating a new script, and then you write what, what kind of script you want.

We can uh

get the

get the quake to do some, some fun stuff here.

And here we are prompting for a real simple one for maybe what a new user would want to to know about grasshopper.

and uh

and like that

And as, as normally you would use grass also.

Of course, you can then

uh use the quay and then return to grasshopper and play around to see.

see what the parameters are, are doing and stuff like that.

And then in addition to this uh simpler ones. Here's a sample for creating some

nice Voronoi pattern to sort of start the experiment more.

And further actions are are this continuous script action.

where we can select from where we want to continue in the script and then

further add, add components, add, uh, add logic, and, uh.

do some nice

had some 3D height, for example, in, in that case.

And then

not only just creating uh scripts or components to kvas.

You can also organize it because

if you use gra grasshopper, you know that uh

at some point, the, the script gets really big and messy, so

we can uh

prompt Kwai here to

create some groups. We can group them how we want and, and also had even our, our color scheme to them.

And in this case, just uh some random colors, but you can apply your own color scheme and, and own.

logic groups how you want.

And similarly, also it's what's important when working with grasshopper is to also comment.

as with you, you do with, uh, with, with code normally also, so.

if you're the return to the script, uh, in a few weeks or

or past the trip along with a colleague.

You then have sort of quality assurance that OK.

you can follow along and, and sort of remember what, what was done before.

Yes

Right, so, uh, what's then going on here with Jorque and, and what's the AI stuff doing here.

OK, good.

So what we saw in the, in the videos uh just a minute ago, I mean so a user prompt.

So here we want to create some uh curve and, and, and extrude it.

That's what the user sees

then we send that to the, to the AI in this case, it's a large language model.

and

from that prompt, it can analyze the request and

and create some uh some list of needed components.

This list of components gets then sent back to Duwai.

where we further enhance the list of components.

that we add some metadata from the API from the aggressop API.

What kind of connections and what kind of data types we, the components are actually using.

So now we have a really nice context for the final call to the, to the AI.

where then actually creates this script for us.

and then the final return is we returned as a Jason instructor Jason.

which we then can

can parse and uh actually create the script and components to the canvas.

which will then be, be shown to the, the user.

And uh

with all the air components or

releasing new and better models, uh, every few months

We also get some more interesting results from those.

Uh, here we are wearing a GPT 4 to create a

a spiral staircase

and in, in addition to this, uh,

uh

enhanced models, we also add some self-evaluating and self-repair steps.

So for example here, Koke, the first try to stairs looks a bit wonky. They're a little bit boxy.

but then it's self-evaluating and self-repairing its grip and

we get something that uh

looks like an OK spiral staircase. And here again we can play around with the

staircase script and, and learn and uh and do more stuff with it.

Yes

At the last video was a good example. I, I remember 2019, I was participating

uh Triple Construction.

event in Copenhagen if someone was there, uh, at the time, there was one presentation exactly 1 to 1 staircase like we saw.

seconds ago. That was uh

maybe 50 or 20 minute presentation because he did it live, manually.

And when you think that now, now we can just uh type it and it's uh

2 seconds and the end result is actually the same.

But like the wake has received an excellent.

uh

very welcoming people well.

were very eager to try and learn and utilitize this hay possibility.

It has spread out through our

corporate or company. Uh, it's only in-house plugin at the moment, and

there are lots of different subtitles that are actually utilitizing that different technical disciplines. It is very good example that uh

kind of one small solution.

opens gates to lots of

lots of different uh

technical experts and, and how, how it's helpful for them.

Big warrior of Ros

And because of that

last year, end of the year, we started to think that, OK,

this is fantastic thing for us when we get new somewhat rainies and things like that. But what about if we give it

to any student already.

as a free and we created parallel version out of this, and currently we have made lots of agreements.

with universities and uh uh technical schools and things like that. So this is

kind of take away any of you because you are around the world. If you have contacts

for any, any university. So, so just

share

this last slide with them.

and uh

point out that uh there's a free option to start to learn this, this, uh, great parametric modeling word and um and um

uh that is actually the only thing you need to do that.

you are caught because all the information is there, but we like to connect with different schools.

and that's about it.

Thank you

Right, thank you to Oman, Christo, if you can, Christoph also go there, so it will be seeing in the stream also, so basically there's already one question in in the uh

event up, but I guess you're basically answered it already, but there's a question that is quay available outside Ramble and have you compare it to Raven.

So

uh, yeah, I know also Raven, it's fantastic tool also, and this is available if you are a student, so if you want to use it, go back to school, but um, but otherwise, the basic work is uh

only

in-house rumble product.

Right

Do we have any questions in the audience?

yet?

Yeah

Thank you for the presentation. It's really great tools. One question hanging is like, well, seems like the demo focusing on generating scripts or a grasshopper, do they have also analytical capacity, like for example, I'm using my Codex to basically understand new ripo. So basically can we use it as like open grasshopper and then ask Chad but like, can, can you analyze this grasshopper script and tell me the logic of it.

Yeah, basically that's what it's sort of doing when we showed how it's grouping those scripts and how it's adding comments.

based on the knowledge that it gets from grasshopper and metadata, it can then analyze and group it and also from the comments, you can get some sort of understanding that.

what it's doing there

which is really helpful

All right, no more questions. Maybe I will ask quickly one that now when this is, of course, being used for a while in Bramble that have you seen like any spike on innovations that like or someone exploring the options and, and because if you're leading the development side of, of actually doing.

something differently and, and, and, and enhancing the workflows. Is there like new ideas popping when people are getting used to grasshopper and, and yeah, I can, and so that it's actually creating some positive feedback or on innovative way of

proposing new functionalities and, and, uh, there's a huge interest if this could be doable inside Autoca and it's on, on our roadmap for sure.

All right. Hey, let's give another set of applause tou Aman Kristo.

Thank you very much

All right. So next on the list we have just since the slide.

Oh.

Yeah

So

uh

enhancing design workflows with computer vision case studies in concrete and we just analysis Jonas Hellmann from Specker.

please

Thanks, Nero

Hello, and I will talk about later two use cases for computer vision, how we can automate some practical problems our engineers have.

My name is Jonas Heleminena. I work at the Sweco as a technology manager.

Uh, you have probably heard Spe already, but Speko is Europe's leading engineering and architecture consultancy.

Before we start the actual cases where we have used the computer vision, a couple of words on about the background, why this topic is something relevant in our industry.

Uh, like you all know, a majority of the AEC project data is visual. Like we have a diagrams, we have drawings, we have a lot of, a lot of information in the visual format that it's not in a text that can we can easily um

feed into LLMs and so on.

So even the, even though the natural language processing has become quite standard. There is still lots of uh areas where we have ways to automate and improve our efficiency.

Of course, we have a beam beam models as a standard nowadays, but there is still those legacy burat format sand.

um, some cases where the information is not shared in that being modest, even though the beam model is being graded, for example, when we work with the different suppliers and different companies.

So that rates that point that the computer vision is quite underutilized even though we already had one presentation even in this session about the computer vision, there is still room for improvement.

and there is those uh repeated visual anis text where it could be used.

Uh, these two cases are real word use case where we had used the computer vision and they are not exactly to big, uh, whole disturbing cases, but the actual real problems our engineers are having in their everyday work.

These are quite mundane, quite practical cases where we could automate part of the work they are doing.

Uh, these two cases use quite different uh strategies for applying the computer vision in the first case with the concrete sample analysis, we are using the foundation model.

and in the second case with the virus drawing the rates and we are using the hybrid approach where we are combining two different models for getting the best results.

Uh, this just highlights that, uh, sometimes we can't use uh one way how we are approaching these problems, but we need to be flexible and adapt.

our uh solutions to these problems we are having.

So the first case is about the concrete sample analysis, and this is a very concrete and practical problems that we are having. And basically, what is this case is, is that we are having this kind of samples.

uh imities of this concrete samples that is then used for calculating concrete polarity.

This is highly manual work and if you can see or notice in these pictures, for example, in here, all of these different particles in this pictures are being colored manually black.

to achieve a better result than in later analysis.

And as you can imit, imagine this is a highly time consuming problem.

because

well, our engineers are doing this manually and they are spending time coloring these images, which is not very high, high-value analysis, but white mundane task.

and of course their workflow is quite inconsistent that the result differs if it's a

different sample or who is doing that. So this makes quite attractive target for uh automation because we are having a well defined task. We have repeated high volume of these images being processed and it's

showing clear potential for improving the efficiency.

How we tackle this problem was to use image segmentation.

So basically, we used the already existing foundation model segmenting model from meta for image segmentation.

which shows a best result for us.

Basically how that um model works is that it identifies and separates those individual particles for automated coloring, so we could automatically put those particles from those images that we need to cover and we don't need to do that manually.

And that um segment anything moral is a foundational model, so it's not

uh built for this specific use case. It's a very generic used in many different use cases with different images and that

uh, highlights the point that we don't always need something very specific, even in our industry, although this we have very specific problems, sometimes more generic models were quite well in this kind of problems.

And

as you can see from the picture, we achieve a partitionial automa. Of course, the result is not perfect. There, as you can see, there is a lot of room for improvement. So in those

in that image, all of the green ones are co bought by human and by the moral.

and all the

blue ones are colored by human but not by the othermas of those are like false negatives and those purple ones is colored by automation but not by humans or false positives.

So

they require some false positives, but not that many, so there, that was a good indicator that there is like potential in this approach that, of course, if we are coloring the particles that doesn't exist and so on, uh.

our designers would very fast, close.

uh trust for this process, so it was always better to have those false negatives rather than having the false positives because then they just go to go those ones that, uh, automation couldn't find.

Of course, the

uh accuracy is probably going up with the further development. This was the first version that we deployed in the production in this state and.

that was because it already sold quite much potential for the automation. It basically, uh, caught the time to have that it takes to call out these pictures just by applying that model.

And of course, if we are achieving the better, better accuracy we can even.

change and scale the whole workflow and not requiring that much in the human in the loop.

And he received and highlighted some of those areas where there are some mistakes that automation did, not sure how well those can be spot in this uh

uh slide, but, uh, there were some areas where it would be difficult for human to tell where the Rocco, the particle ends.

If you are not a professional like in this case.

And also some of these uh false positives that were covered were the air bubbles.

which, well, are in the

algorithms stands quite clear and quite easily spotted sick ments, but of course those shouldn't be shouldn't be colored.

And one thing to remember is also that uh also the manual work is not perfect. It also does the mistakes. So even sometimes the color, the the Alma did a better job in some of these cases than the human did.

The second case was about theoutras drawing in the Federation, and this is much more common problem in our industry, not

not where that specific like the previous one, but still very concrete and practical problem that is still yet to be solved.

and

this wood trusses are very common in Finland, like nearly 90% of the DA houses are using them, but they are also being used in the schools and apartment buildings and so on. So they are very widely widely used in Finland.

Um, the problem that comes with that is that there is no standard format for these drawings formative depends heavily on the supplier.

and

they are used to being delivered in the 2DBDF format, so even though we might have been more available, these are still delivered in the Dudibilia format, so we can't even use that uh information that we have in the beam model.

In this case, we are only focusing in one single type of this vote trustees.

which are so some examples on that, right?

Uh, not everything in this drawings is important for us to is only 6 measures that we are needing for structural calculations or structural designing these.

And those are the ones that we are only needed to get

and it is not enough to read the text that is in these measures. I mean, that would be quite easy to use it uh OCR, the optical record merecognizing and so.

but the problem is that we need to also the core connect those different measures to those different dimensions that we want to get.

and maybe approach this was to use the.

hybrid approach

and we used the OCR for actually recognizing the text that is being written into those measures that is shown in those drawings.

with, uh, they were using Keras OCR.

and then we are using Open CVs, good features the track, which implements Sitomasi, algorithm to detect the corners and the intersections in those drawings.

Uh, the reason why we did that was that exactly that we wanted to know which dimension that exact text is actually highlighting

and uh

this allowed us to separate the workflow into two different complementary tasks that we are not only focusing in one way, but

we are actually having two different algorithms for two different problems combined and then we achieved the

most effective solution.

that actually saw the potential for this kind of approach.

This is still being in development.

I hope that we had finished this already before this conference, but this is still in development.

and the results were much more mixed than in that previous example that I sought with the concrete samples.

the performance was not that reliable. There were some cases it found the correct measures and we were

uh able to spot the dimensions that we needed, but in many cases there were some mistakes.

because of the non-standard way of these drawings in being

supplied or being delivered to us.

Uh, this demonstrated a lot of potential, but

it still needs further development before we can actually push this to the production.

and maybe the way to go forward would be having some semi-automation like having human interloop approach and not trying to achieve the full automation with this.

like we had in the first phase.

For example, human could point out the wanted measure and train the model for the future analysis or future development or even think something more.

human in the mind approach.

but

this is just highlights that these are not the technical experiments that we are doing in here, but we are actually having

real examples from the practice from the problems that our engineers are having

And of course, if he would have a more standardization in our

drawings and in general in our industry, all of these kinds of problems would be much easier.

and just to highlight the

problems how those different algorithms worked in here, you can see how the all the

corner points are being correctly found and we can spot those those from those drawings, and we can then analyze its dimensions are most likely related to with text and also

uh finding those texts is, well, all problems and those algorithms work very well, so there is no problems finding and recognizing the text from the drawings.

but the, the problem is that sometimes, for example, in this case, all of these are being combined in the one single line and that kind of problems.

So, conclusion.

It's clear that the computer vision can remove the bottlenecks and automate part of our design processes.

like we saw in the first case with that concrete sample of workflow, uh,

sometimes we can use the foundational models for achieving the best results that we don't need to build something custom for each of the problems, but we can have

something already being made and this of course reduced the cost and speed up the development.

Well, in some cases like with that other case that I saw with the food rush drawing.

It's a

clear that we are not all was able to use those already built foundation models with more generic approach that we need something.

custom of something specific for this problems and it also provided us import at lesson that the real bird is a messy place.

It's all always easy to think about these problems with

the

smaller data sets or

cases where we are not that

uh having that messy data, but like we have heard earlier today and yesterday they were real good and the data could be messy, so.

something to keep in mind

But just to highlight those that those visual tasks exist in our industry and there is room for improvement that not only focusing those text-based algorithms and text-based automations with LLMs but also the visual side.

And sometimes their progress happens with small steps and not those huge whole industry disrupting steps that we are always so eager to hear.

Thank you

All right. Thank you, Jonas. That was really interesting. Uh, like you said, some lack of standardization is, is, uh, pushing us to find ways with like computer vision and AI to like do some visual tasks that might even not be there if there was more standardization, but uh just trying to check

to what happened. Yeah, now there's one question.

Uh, did you have to fine-tune some 2 model.

SAM2 model.

Yes, uh, we did uh fine doing it a bit.

Uh, the first

out of the box result where somewhat promising, like you can see in this picture that uh it did spot those particles quite well, but of course we needed to be improve that uh put more of those particles and also

uh

well, reduce those falls, false positives that we were having.

All right. Is there any other questions on the orders? Yeah.

Yeah. Thank you. Interesting use cases, one question about the trust drawings, it's mostly like in scan format or is it also like DWG or just native BDF.

uh

the reason why we needed to use those as a picture where that uh

well those were BDFs and also sometimes they were not as native uh BDF formats or some of the lines were not as a line, but those were at that so imiti to those PDFs. So we wanted to have a up approach that would work in the most of our

uh suppliers

All right

Any other questions

on, on the

stream either. Well, oh, there's one, yeah.

uh

we, we actually had a similar cases in our

research lab about detecting, I mean, this kind of remit recognition basically tried to analyze uh detailed section to create this assembly graph and we encounter a very similar problem. At one track that we use and still have a mixed results. So I want to discuss with you. Have you thought about combining this uh classical computer fusion with VLM. So basically use it as a prior and then somehow kind of combined the best of both worlds.

uh, because we are doing with the VLM and we encounter good enough results, but with a lot of, you know, from visible from engineering and stuff like that.

So yeah, I wonder whether there is a bit of a nice way to the sweet spots that we can combine classical comproficient with state of the art VLM, that's Gemy that is strong enough to understand context. Thank you.

Yeah, uh, that's a good point. And we also had the different ideas, how we could uh continue to development. Of course, in the business, uh

we sometimes would like to test more and more and improve the performance, but sometimes we uh have to reappro real world problems with their budgets and so on, so that was just the first phase of this and of course.

of course we need to continue with the development.

All right, thanks again Jonas, and let's give a one more round of applause.

Then next topic we have from markup to verification and AI tool for automated rebar drawing Q&A and QC, please welcome on stage, Manoi Manoj, yeah, Mano, Manosh, yeah.

Right. Uh, thank you for the welcome.

Hi guys, so I'm Manoj. I'm the founder and CEO of Struct Digital, and we're basically sort of a tech consultancy for AC design firms, make a lot of customs software and automate workflows.

Um, so my background is I actually trained as a structural engineer, so I have a lot of hands-on experience in the fields. Um, and one thing that I always hated um doing when I was a structural engineer, I was checking sort of rebar and shop drawings. Um, it takes a lot of time and it's something that even, you know, humans can't read properly. Um, but with the advent of, you know, these different AI models, etc. Um, we thought that was a better way.

uh to sort of fuse AI to sort of automate these processes. Um, so I just in the conversation with a few of my colleagues, and we sort of decided to start this sort of side research project when we had free time. And, and that's what I'm going to be talking to you about today. It's basically using AI to sort of automate um rebar QAQC.

I don't think it's going to the next slide.

Yeah, so, um, there's a lot of challenges associated to the task because like I mentioned before, um

basically like rebar shop drawings are very complex. Um, they're actually very hard for humans to read as well. Um, so getting AI to read it would be a substantial challenge. Um, and then also like usually a very high volume of these in a project that's generally 100s to to sometimes even thousands of free brushop drawings for projects. Um, and it also takes a lot of engineering time um to do these like a typical engineer would take 4 to 5 hours to sort of

um check like a typical rebar flow plan.

Um, and basically, when, when you do the checking and, and sort of you do make a mistake, the cost is very high. Um, so first of all, there's a huge safety risk. Um, so say you missed, you know, say some punching sure reinforcement, um, that can lead to say a localized failure. So there's a huge sort of safety risk to it. Um, and there's also like a lot of costs associated with it, right? Um, basically, if you miss something and someone else finds it at a later stage, um, there's a lot of cost which goes into rework. Actually, according to the construction

Industry Institutes up to 78% of rework in construction projects, um, basically stem from

the sort of design documentation letters, uh, and then rework due to errors in re-body telling can sort of account for 5 to 10% uh of, of typical construction costs, which is basically most likely the sort of the profit estimate of a contractor, um, and there's also like huge liability uh if you're sort of screwed up.

OK, uh, I'm just gonna give you a very high level sort of overview of of the workflow we took to achieve this and then sort of go on a bit more detail. Um, so the first one is basically

um the digital truth, uh which is which is basically just like a RC intent document with the structural engineer draws up. Um, that basically says, hey, like, you know, over here, you put in this reinforcements over here, you put in this reinforcements, and here you sort of add in additional reinforcement, say next to like a floor opening, etc. Um, and then we sort of

um, using our tech, we sort of extract the logic from this and assign it like location and then we feed it to our sematic comparison engine.

Um, and then what it does is it then goes to the next actual shop drawing, and then it does the same thing. Um, the data is in a different formats, we have to do some conversions. Uh, and then if there's any discrepancy, it basically sort of highlights it to the user. Um, OK, so let's start off. So this is sort of would be like a typical RC intense, as you can see, there's uh, the engineer has specified what reinforcements to use and then there's additional reinforcement, etc. and what the program does

is it basically uses like a combination of LLM, OCR, uh, and a computer vision model, uh, to basically give this very nice taste on which says, OK, if it's an additional reinforcement, the type of reinforcement, the spacing, and basically the location. Um

so you do have to do certain things to get to the stage. You have to set a scale and ideally you want the file format to be in PDF, so it's easier for, uh, the tech to parse it.

And the next step is basically scanning the shop drawing, right, as you can see, it's pretty complex and the way it's annotated is very different, so we had to train like another model to sort of do this classification. Uh, again, we use like a combination of OCR and this model to sort of get information, um, but then there's another step where we have to sort of link the information extracted.

um to um to, to the bars, uh, to the RC bars, um

then after this is sort of the secret sauce, which is sort of the semantic comparison engine. Uh, basically what it does is it takes the data from the design intent, which was the JSON which I showed you earlier, um, and you know, it includes the information such as 816, the 200, and then it gives you the location, so you have the additional reinforcement, and it sort of puts it into this calculator function, which can basically calculate, hey, in this area we need this many bars in this direction. And then it takes information from the fabrication drawings, uh,

which, you know, as you can see, it's a different nomenclature here. It's already calculated and then it translates that into sort of a common language so they can both talk to each other.

And as a very simplified example, it's like, hey, is the spacing correct? Is the bar size correct and is the number of calculated bars correct, and if it's a match, uh, it says, OK, if it's not a match, it's sort of uh sort of annotates it for the user.

Uh, we sort of did a pilot study, uh, we took like a proposed mid-rise concrete floor plan and then we put in design intents, um, so this was a very simple concrete for plan just like one floor, like, uh, no change in levels. And it actually managed to identify 60% of the seeded errors, and it found some genuine errors which humans missed as well. Um, and these were mostly to do with, say, the span length being incorrect, uh, and, and the spacing being correct.

Um

yeah, but there's sort of greater limitations to what this can do now and as it was basically an internal R&D project. It's in sort of, um, like constant improvements. Um, so at the moment, it can't sort of

read handwritten markups, uh, you have to give the data in, in a very clean digital format. Um,

and also it, it can't resolve complex details. So say for example there is a change in flow level that's going to be like complex laps. Uh, it's gonna be other complex details, um, which, which it can't detect at the moment. And generally it works best whenever there's sort of strict alignment, so, so basically the RC intent and the shop drawings need to be

sort of at the same scale and the same origin points for it to work perfectly.

Um, yeah, so that's where we're at currently. We're just at phase one. We're sort of

in an internal prototype phase where sort of figuring out what works, what not, uh, the next phase is sort of using different models, uh, different methodologies to sort of improve it. um, and the phase 3 is involves basically handling sections and details.

Uh, and we're also sort of keeping a look at sort of these multimodal LLM they're sort of improving year on year. So maybe, you know, in 5 years, they'll be able to sort of figure out if a detail is correct or not, so that's something we're, we're keeping in mind as well.

But yeah, that's it. Thank you for your time. Uh, if you have any questions or want to know more, just ask.

Right. Thank you, Manoush. Uh, very interesting presentation.

Uh, do we have any questions on

the audience? I guess there's none.

on the stream

In this one, that's.

Hey, thanks for the presentation. I was wondering, do you have any ideas on how to also dance skill is to handwritten drawings.

Uh sorry, can you repeat that again? Do you have any ideas to how to how to skill this tech to handwritten drawings?

Uh

I do have some ideas. We did try it, but it's not very sort of accurate, um, I mean, I guess if the handwritten lines are almost straight. Uh, it's OK. Uh, but, but I think sort of the key bottleneck we've had is making sure that, um, you know, the intent and the fabrication drawings are sort of on the same scale and aligned. I think that had the greatest sort of factor to accuracy, rather than if it was hand sketched or uh.

Hey, thanks for the presentation. Yeah, I have a question about your business model. Um, how do you manage the risk that you just won't be disrupted by Gemini or ChatGBT and

6 months or 12 months. And, and have you thought about your pricing?

Because you're paying for Revit, Autodesk, this and that and

I think we mapped out like a typical engineer at our firm

It's a small firm uses like

14 different tools and they don't want any more. Uh, so

yeah, so that aspect. Thanks. So, so this is not really like we're not planning to sell this anytime soon. This is just sort of an internal R&D project, um, but if it

I mean, if it does come to sell, we'll probably need to figure that out. Um, but there's just something we did in our spare time, uh, that's fine. We, we thought it was pretty cool.

Any other questions?

Well, I think I, I can then ask one that, uh, how do you see the, so I guess there is like a constant battle of what is the like face you do like certain Q&A's and and like the quality can be like from the native models, some sort of um IFC model that, like you said in there or there was in the

slides that like you cannot do treaty, of course they are drawings, so how do you see the relationship on, on like, of course we know that construction industry works with the drawings it's it's it's very broad, um, but, but I think sort of this tech at least sort of computer vision model. There's, they've sort of existed long before and they were way more popular than sort of LLM models. So I think the core of technology is pretty mature. Um, I just think you need like

a lot more data, a lot more training to sort of get these to the level of accuracy needed. Um, the one good thing is because we have LLMs now we can sort of take that information and compare them with something else much easier than before.

Um

and yeah, I just think like, you know, as technology progresses, people just find better and better ways to utilize it.

right

OK.

Thanks, Manoush. Let's go one more round of applause.

Then for the final presentation we have predictive analytics for daily life factor, real-time machine learning integration in architectural workflows. So Alejatro and Christoph is.

Hm.

and last presentation of the day, that presentation of the conference, uh, how are you feeling?

Good

Let's do it

15 minutes

So, uh, Alejandro

Christoph

uh, together we are two of the four co-founders of Abskiller. It's an AEC startup based in Stockholm.

And today we want to share with you Lux. It's a first development. It's a concrete machine learning application that is already starting to improve the way that architects work in Sweden with um daylight.

and we start with something that we've heard several times today and yesterday, and the productivity gap, uh, of the AI industry compared to other sectors.

And there are some structural reasons that have been mentioned in several presentations that I've heard. I'll just name a few low uh profits that doesn't allow us to invest in innovation or um uh disrupted, uh, um, all, all these temporary coalitions uh that are our projects, no agents that come temporarily together and then they dissolve so there's no data continuity in projects.

But regardless of the reason, the, the result is that we cannot pay uh good salaries in the industry and that the people are unhappy because construction and housing are skyrocketing in pricing and uh our politicians are trying to find ways to reduce these prices. One of the ways they're finding is the deregulating.

And uh one of the things that is being deregulated right now in Sweden is daylighting.

And uh there is a reason why we have a daylight regulation in Sweden and um it is because it's very dark in winter and winter depression is a thing. It affects our productivity, it affects our mood. It affects our um

health even

And so it is a regulation that we want to defend and we want to do it by showing politicians, showing the industry, showing society that we can effectively uh design buildings that comply with high data standards and we can do it without increasing the cost of the general construction process.

So a little bit about myself, uh, I started my career in 2014 as a performance analysis specialist in a big consultancy firm in Stockholm.

And my work back then consistent basically in uh I was getting models, being models from architecture studios and uh I was um adopting the models and preparing them to make all kinds of simulations. Daylight, uh, energy, CO2.

and um so most of the works, most of this work was very uh manual, so I was um I was uh doing this simulations in external software, so I had to manually adapt it manually curate the models, manually quality check that took a lot of time.

So I remember from the first uh beginning thinking that this was a very suboptimal uh process that there was a lot of, a lot of room for improvement that uh this is something that architects should be doing themselves with just a couple of clicks, uh, directly in beam.

So I moved to one of the largest architecture studios in, in Sweden, um, also one with a, with a big good reputation in being innovative being forward-thinking.

And I had the hope that, OK, now I'm going to be working directly with the architects now we can make it happen. Now we can make it.

you know, have a good integration of this performance analysis together.

Unfortunately, my results were not what I was hoping for. We, we got some results but not, not what I was hoping for. And uh after 8 years of fighting with like uh internal politics, bureaucracy, you know, people that don't wanna change the way they always worked, um.

people that have other incentives, other agendas. This, it took some time and it took some energy. So I ended up understanding that I was not going to disrupt a big company from, from within. It's very hard to do that. Um, and I also understood that there were all these new technologies that were uh very quickly increasing the creating this new emerging exciting ways to work with this problem.

And then I was lucky enough to come across three very high competent, very highly motivated people, um, and then I proposed to them that we would work on creating this daylight plugin to do what I

have tried to do like from the beginning, like just do a rabbit plugin that you click a button and you get a daily result.

And this is how our startup Abskiller was born.

and uh we're not the only ones that have tried to solve this problem with daylight in particular. There are some other approaches. There's, for example, early stage indicators that are um very useful like when you start to work with the massing of the buildings.

You also have other predictive machine machine learning models like the one that we have developed here for our tool that Christoph is going to present. The problem with this, this uh models is they were, they were academic models, um, and they were not usable in practice. Most of them were oversimplified. They were not taking into consideration in things like obstructions, like if you don't have in consideration of the building in front of your window? Why would you do a data simulation, right?

Um, and then you have um

then you have optimized, uh, re tracing. So the ray tracing is the method used for data simulations, um, normally, so, uh, a deterministic way to, to, to simulate daylight. So some people have been working on making this simulations faster.

And, and this is cool. This is, this is very, very positive. The problem with this is that you're not really uh tackling all these manual work, all these modeling adoption of this quality checks, um, and that is the main problem.

Um, so, and here I would like to, um, quote Jonathan Broughton from Speckle.

that he said that in our industry, in the ASC industry, velocity doesn't necessarily mean real-time refresh. It means more decision speed.

How fast can we validate a decision choice or how fast can we identify noncompliance with a certain um requirement.

And so, in view of all of this,

we have tried a new approach

and exactly. Our approach is called lux. You see here the revi integration.

is it actually playing? No, it's not.

Uh

Oh yeah, you see, we, um, selecting inside of Rabbit, we select two rooms, we hit the analyze button on directly. You instantly you get a heat map of the daylight distribution, then we resize the windows and this time a little bit bigger. We analyze again and you can see that the heat map instantly adapts to it. Besides the heat map, we also have like a compliance check and um all the values that you need for in-depth analysis.

and with, with this, with

try to showcase that

um it's now very easy to adjust your design and instantly see the impact of these adjustments. So it's very easy to iterate between the design of um options.

And I want to take you now a little bit into the engine room of Lux, um, the whole thing is based on two major cornerstones on the one side, the predictive machine learning model. And on the other side, um, a process that we call advanced geometry and coding.

and both the combination of both is then delivering this instant results directly in your bim workflow that you trust so.

We are

pilot testing this right now with um Li architecture and white architecture in Sweden.

and already there we can see some estimations that we probably with this workflow we're going to save

80

up to 90% of time using this workflow compared to the traditional, um, daylight simulation.

And additionally, um, thanks to a Swedish Foundation, the listening stiussen. We are also able to produce a web-based platform that will allow um uploading IFC and um analyzing IFCs.

All right, then we're gonna um have a look in

to the first cornerstone, the predictive machine learning model.

Um, this is basically um an algorithm that is answering your question. In our case, the question or that the input is this encoded um image of the respective room that you want to analyze. It's including, um, a window on actually the obstructions and all the colors are encoded, is encoding specific data.

and

what we want to get from the

as an answer from the model is the daylight distribution inside this room. Yeah, and of course as accurate as as possible.

So that the model can learn all of this. We built up a training starter set.

This is consisting out of 20,000 rooms.

They were all para parametrically generated.

then we

used every room and we put them in one of 43 context models so that we can get different types of um obstructions.

And then we run a classical daylight simulation via ray tracing.

And then all this was fed into our database. So we have the encoded room and on the other side we have the daylight simulation, and with all of this, the model was able to um

yeah, via pattern recognition, it is now able to give out accurate daylight.

um predictions, even for new and unseen inputs.

And yeah, also to mention the, all the heavy work is like happening.

um in the

during the training. So

the prediction itself in yourIM workflow is super lightweight on almost instant.

Um, then one more um key innovation that we have in our model, as Alejandro said, we are considering the obstructions like biconies or neighboring buildings. This is possible, um

for us because we have this encoding bar on the very right as you've seen in our encoded image and then we are using something, a process that we call poor window decomposition. So we are computing each window contribution to daylight individually, so room with two windows will actually run 2 analysis and then we merge everything to the final result.

This simplification keeps um the problem manageable for the model and yeah, allows us to um

to include the obstructions.

Then we have a look at the other cornerstone that I mentioned, the advanced geometry encoding.

Um, if you do the traditional daylight simulation, you have to clean up the model that you get, and they are mostly messy and and complex.

We are trying to skip this step almost entirely.

Our encoding is only extracting what is needed for daylight, so we keep it in this case very basic. So it's less sensitive to error.

And additionally, we have some heuristics that can heal um sit certain situations so that we end up with a fast robust process that is less sensitive to, yeah, imperfections.

Also, it's scalable. You can run it in parallel, so like analyzing one room takes

around the same time as analyzing a whole building floor.

and yes, but there are still remaining challenges, and that's, you know, connected to the slide before, um, mess in the models you'll find a huge messiness and high vulnerability of elements.

Different companies have different ways to model and have different conventions.

So right now we are focusing more on the standard use cases. That means um some highly specially shaped windows um are not supported right now or some super specific rare geometries.

but

um we did this already successfully. We can, of course, grow our dataset retroactively. That means if we have some specific

geometry that we want to add, um, we can

expand our data set, train again, and then the model will also take off these nuances and can analyze it. So right now we're focusing on the 90 95% of elements that

are always there and then step for step we're gonna look into the um

yeah, edge cases.

Then I will just give a quick outlook over the current work we are doing right now. We are validating our accuracy with researchers from the University of Lund.

Llund, um, and we will

present the results at the Built in Nordic in August of this year. Um

um,

on another side, we are better testing at the moment together with municipalities, architecture officers and developers. And last but not least, least, we are also developing a new metric, daylight autonomy, uh, slightly more complex, daylight, um metric, but it will allow us a more fine-grained um simulation.

or analysis

And we want to finish with some takeaways and some predictions based on, on, on our work. Uh, first, we believe that uh collaborations with doing startups are more established, uh, actors is going to be a key to like get us out as of this like stagnation of innovation that we have in in the industry.

Second, we see some promising developments, um, toward this effective integration of different performance analysis uh in directly within beam and, and connecting this with a general AI and, and, and with LLMs and uh it's one of the things is something that I've also been mentioned in several uh presentations before. This uh converting beam uh files to graphs and like connecting it with a different graph machine learning models that we could like uh this way like

convert this beam models into uh structure queriable databases.

uh that we can, uh, you know, we can add this layers of semantics and and stuff and then we can, uh, in this way, like this can be a big game changer for us as a, as a working with this type of uh integrations.

and

not really

can you, can you change this slide again.

OK, and no.

back.

Uh there. And then the, the role of architects, we see the role of architects shifting toward a more generalistic uh role uh where architects instead of like, you know, uh coordinating a big team of like different specialists, human specialists, they will be relying more on these AI tools or AI agents to like incorporate this uh more uh specialized tasks into their workflow without necessarily being experts.

And uh we see specialists like we'll end up focusing a little bit more on high-end, high value uh tasks, uh, so they will not be doing so much mechanical, mechanical work. And for example, in our case, we're still using um specialists to validate the fund, validate the final results and to uh produce the, the, the, the reports.

And lastly, we see more of this simplified uh automated tools like the one that we are developing, uh, to that work well enough or or good, good enough for the vast majority of projects and then that we keep the all this high accuracy, high specialized uh customized tools for this high profile uh projects that are, are a little bit more flagship projects.

So we would like to hear a little bit your view on any of these four topics as we present as discussion topics and uh feel free to reach out here or, or on LinkedIn. Thank you for listening.

All right. Thank you, Aleanro and Christoph both stay a little bit, yeah, that's good. Uh, I'm just checking if there's any questions on the stream. No. Any questions on the

audience

I guess we are, oh, there's one, getting a little bit tired. It's the last.

training set only 2D or how do you approximate 3D?

The training set, how we created it.

Like is it uh trained in 2D or like how do you approximate a 3D room to

to like a 2D encoder

Yeah, it is so the training that said this parametrically generated and it's a 3D, it's, it's 3D like uh we parametrically generate all the rooms like with different

uh like parameters for the geometry and then we populate like a real models of real neighborhoods in the city of Stockholm in this case and uh so it's all happening like.

um in, in 3D but for in, in the end, the, the encoding that we create for the model, then it's, it's getting simplified to 2D again and the height information of, for example, of the room is encoded in colors for for the model.

All right. Any other questions? Maybe I will then ask the last one. So how do you see like, uh, from the point of, uh, like an artificial light because you are now mostly talking to architects. Is there something that links also like a lighting designers and somewhat uh because there's data coming up now and of course, like we can uh do a lot with

lighting design also yeah, yeah, and now there's there's no connection to like the sign. These other men, this other metric that Christo mentioned dela Automy is more connected to Latin design because it's, it's another type of metric that testing include consideration actual lacks actual light levels every hour of the year. So this is something that can be used to calculate like how much electric lighting you need to compensate. All right.

Hey, thanks a lot and let's give one more round of applause.

to

And I guess

that's it then. So, thank you very much for joining in this session and, and I guess the event is almost over.

Thank you

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

The "Computational Design" session at AI in AEC 2026 explored the transformative role of artificial intelligence in reshaping workflows within architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC). Featuring speakers such as Miro Lehtimäki, Dirk Münzner, Alejandro Pacheco Diéguez, Joonas Helminen, Kristoffer Berglund, Christop Berkmiller, Shicong Cao, Tuomo Palomaa, Manoj Bala Radhakrishna, and Ramiz Mohareb, the session highlighted innovative applications of AI across diverse domains. Discussions ranged from AI-enhanced post-occupancy evaluations to parametric modeling in Grasshopper, with Kwaki, an AI plugin, streamlining computational design processes. Real-world projects like the Lake Constance tunnel demonstrated AI-driven infrastructure automation, while Lux, a daylight simulation platform, integrated real-time daylight factor analysis into IFC models, enabling architects to optimize designs efficiently. Predictive analytics for daylight autonomy were incorporated into Revit workflows, offering rapid simulations for enhanced decision-making. Hybrid approaches combining OCR and computer vision were showcased in wood truss analysis, and AI-powered semantic comparison engines improved QA/QC processes in rebar design verification. Feedback loops in design optimization facilitated iterative improvements, while data-driven urban health insights revealed how environmental factors like parks and cafes impact well-being more than hospital density. Challenges in BIM standardization underscored the need for consistent methodologies, and sustainable AI practices addressed energy and resource consumption in computational workflows. The session also emphasized AI's growing role in urban planning and environmental design, demonstrating its potential to enhance collaboration, reduce manual effort, and drive innovation across AEC disciplines. Through these discussions, the speakers illustrated how AI is not only a tool for efficiency but also a catalyst for reimagining the future of design and construction.

Speakers

AP

Alejandro Pacheco Diéguez

-

Upskiller.xyz

CB

Christop Berkmiller

-

Upskiller.xyz

DM

Dirk Münzner

-

BuP. Boll Beraten und Planen

JH

Joonas Helminen

-

Sweco

KB

Kristoffer Berglund

-

Ramboll

MR

Manoj Bala Radhakrishna

-

struct.digital

ML

Miro Lehtimäki

-

Ramboll

RM

Ramiz Mohareb

-

BuP. Boll Beraten und Planen

SC

Shicong Cao

-

DataDrivenAEC

TP

Tuomo Palomaa

-

Ramboll

================================================================================
SESSION 14: Session 11: Construction
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

On 11 with the topic of construction. We will have 5 great presentations about how can we make a change with AI, so we will have topics from health and safety, environmental things, then we will see the future of teamworks, and we will also have um

also how AI can help us not only finding uh errors or mistakes, but to how to predict them and then we can avoid them completely.

And, uh, for our first presentation will be given by Guo Mahoki.

Uh, no, no. Almost, almost, almost. We practiced and I failed. He says he's from, I says he's from Italy. He says he's global, but his presentation is about checklists to uh from checklist to agents, AI for health, safety, and environment in construction. So welcome Mr. International.

Thank you and uh hello everyone. So over the last few years we've been building AI systems for some of the world's largest AEC enterprises. And along the way, we've learned something that we think is fundamental about how AI should work in this industry, and it's something that we also feel most innovation teams and enterprises are getting wrong, and that's what I want to share with you today. How to build effective AI in AEC through platform engineering, demonstrating it through a very

specific and real deployment of our platform in the domain of construction safety.

So, my name is Guido Machachi. I'm the founder and director of AEC Foundry, where we partner with AEC firms across architecture, engineering, construction, and manufacturing, um, to transform their expertise into intelligent systems.

So let's talk a little bit about what's happening in AI in our industry right now. So what you see on the left is what most of the market has to offer today. Vendor locked AI that works inside one platform's data boundary, but is blind to everything else. Generic models and generic platforms that don't understand AEC native data.

like drawings and bin models schedules and specifications and so on.

And then we have point solutions. They don't scale, they don't compound, and they don't integrate with each other. What we think it should be is an open and vendor neutral platform where you have access to any technology and model, so that you can keep up with the pace of a rapidly changing technology. We think it should be able to natively read and understand the data that we're concerned with as an industry, not just text and images, uh, and spreadsheets

and the most important thing of all is that we think the best way to develop AI is through a compounding platform model where every use case that you build and deploy builds on shared knowledge that exists and extends the intelligence layer for the next use case and the use case after that.

So for us, this is what it looks like in practice. We call our platform AECOS, and it's an AI operating system for the AEC industry. But what I want you to focus on here is the structure. On the left you have your systems of record, ACC and Procore and SharePoint. This is where all of your project data and your institutional knowledge lives and on the right we have systems of action. This is where intelligence and actions flow back out of the platform into down

s t re am systems and back into your systems of record. Most importantly, of course, is the platform that sits in the middle, and it's a neutral layer that sits between your systems. It doesn't try to replace anything. It tries to connect everything and make it more intelligent.

And this is the key. So if we just start from the bottom and go up the layers, um, very quickly. So we have connectors and ingestion pipelines that keep the platform data in sync with system data and the data living in your systems. We have dedicated intelligent document processing pipelines that are specifically built for AEC native data that are able to extract and parse and transform unstructured data from drawings and models and contracts and specifications and so on

into AI readable knowledge. We store that knowledge in knowledge bases.

These knowledge bases become accessible through our orchestration and automation layer to agents and pipelines, and we can configure those through workflows and tasks to perform actions either manually, semi-autonomously, or fully autonomously, always with human in the loop review.

Then we have evaluation and continuous improvement. These are the feedback loops driven by subject matter experts that improve the system over time and feed back into the system. And then we have dedicated interfaces that adapt dynamically to user intent and go well beyond simple chat interfaces and all of this is sitting on the most important layer of all, which is the reactive event Foundation, which is responsible for tracking every single action and

event that happens on the platform. Every agent responds. Every human question, every interaction, every review, and this is the most important layer in a regulated industry like AEC because this layer is what builds that transparency and trust in AI. We're always able to go back and see where and why a decision was made.

So if we ground this in in the real deployment that I was talking about, why we focus on safety. So we're currently working with a top 10 global EPC in oil and gas operating in the Middle East in a megaproject environment, so they manage between 5 to 20,000 workers on a site and any one time, and health and safety just happened to be the sharpest pain point or one of the sharpest pain points for the organization and a particularly good entry point

for us to prove what a platform first approach can do. So health and safety is document heavy. It's regulation driven and almost entirely manual in terms of workflows. So that creates a very, very good opportunity

Also, we don't need to talk about the stats. Everyone knows the construction industry remains the most hazardous private sector industry in the world. In the US alone, 1000 people died in one year, and at the annual cost of those injuries and fatalities is around $12 billion. The problem is that the safety data and all of the data that you would need to be able to prevent those injuries and fatalities is there. It's just simply inaccessible. It's scattered across many different systems, many different media, many different

formats, and it's just simply inaccessible when it's needed and where it's needed.

So the result is that safety management is typically the job of record keeping and pretty bad record keeping at that for compliance purposes, not for the purposes of trying to actually improve safety. And the result is that about 50+% of a safety management team's time goes into manual data reconciliation and not safety. So this is one of the things that we were trying to change with this client. So our approach is a three

la y er ed approach, and these layers map back directly to the platform infrastructure I showed you before. We've got ingestion, uh, pipelines, specifically built to ingest certain types of documents that I'll show you later in the demo. We have the knowledge bases where we collect and organize safety knowledge like OSHA standards and the companies's hazard taxonomies, the standard operating procedures and their risk assessment frameworks. And then finally we have orchestration. We have pipelines and agents

that can work autonomously or through human interaction that can leverage all these pipelines and knowledge bases to perform safety management tasks and workflows end to end.

So where the platform meets the field, we chose three specific use cases to start working on this, and we're still working on this. It's a live project for us. So the, the first use case is start forms, so these are safety task analysis, risk reduction talk forms. Apologize for the long acronym. I didn't make it up, but these are basically daily stand-ups that teams have on site before they start work to identify all of the safety, potential safety hazards they might encounter, but they record these on

a paper form, and I'll get back to that later on. Why, white paper, um, safety observations, similar process. These are notes and photographs and videos and texts collected on site, typically by safety supervisors that notice when something is wrong or someone is performing an unsafe behavior. They take a picture, they take notes, and then they collate all of those and have to then put it back into the systems and finally safety analytics.

So at the moment, the management team only has access to static dashboards built on lagging indicators and data that they really can't trust, um, they don't typically understand the dashboards. The dashboards are there, but nobody reads them. So nobody's actually interacting with any of the data they do manage to collect and structure.

Um, so let's go to the, to the live demo now so that we can see exactly how this works.

So, we start in a system of records. In this case it's Google Drive, but it could be anything else. And let's pretend we're uploading a start form, so it's a safety manager. They've done their meeting. Everyone's completed the start form and he's uploading it to Google Drive and keep in mind that at that scale of a mega project, this happens with thousands of forms per day. So these are collected from many, many teams, and they have to be put together in the same system. The client at the moment has a team whose only job

for the entirety of the project, and this is multiple people. They're only job is to open up scanned images of these forms and translate them into Excel, right? So we have, this is our platform we've connected it to the Google Drive as a connector. As soon as the star form drops into Google Drive, it triggers a document extraction pipeline that extracts all of the form, uh, data into a structured schema that is user defined.

um, we just go quickly back just a second there, and then we have uh human in the loop uh review, which does two things. One, the low confidence extractions are surfaced to human experts for review when they review and correct the output, the corrected output goes back into the system to improve the next extraction. So it's a self-improving system through human in the loop review.

Um

so this is just one case of document extraction on the same platform. Imagine thousands upon thousands of these things getting processed today. So, of course, that team no longer exists. They can just use the platform.

Um

the next use cases that I'm going to show is safety observations and from this point on, I want you to imagine this is sort of the user journey of a safety manager, but the platform, of course, is used by several different personas, different entry points, but let's just pretend for the sake of the demonstration that we're a safety manager and we're interacting with the data that we're collecting, uh, observations we're making, and then we're going to analyze some of the data and you can see how this slowly builds up more and more. So the first

task we're gonna run is a safety observation task, and a task is simply a predefined workflow or objective for AI to complete. In this case, we upload a picture and some text about what we noticed on site and the agent takes the image, takes the text, it references back to the knowledge base, uh, standard operating procedures and potential risks and then creates a structured safety observation within the chat itself, right? So you get this in line, but it's a dynamic interface that

adapts to the intent of that particular task. So now we have from just an image and a little bit of text

and of course location-based information and stuff like that, we get a very comprehensive safety observations structured with risk scoring that is consistent with hazards that are consistent with language that is consistent, so typically you get two safety managers to try and categorize or classify the same thing, they're going to do it differently. The system standardizes that across the board so that the data you get is of high quality at the end.

So

we've seen the results of the safety observation. Now we ask the agent to look in the OSHA in the knowledge base to check for any OSHA guidelines related to this observation. The observation was about scaffolding. We don't have to specify that and we get back, um, the OSHA-related regulations and safety guidelines for safe scaffolding activities, and as you notice all of this is citation backed with references directly to the individual texts within the documents.

so that you can always trust but verify the information that you're getting back from the language model. Zero hallucinations here, please. Thank you.

And then uh we go on to the next one. So we've, we've done the observation. We've got the OSHA guidelines for scaffolding.

Now we're doing something very different. We're asking what cameras are we hooked up to?

So we hooked up the platform to live streams from cameras on site that we had access to. I cannot show you the live streams from the construction site for obvious reasons, but the data is there. So the live streams from the camera feed into another intelligent processing pipeline that leverages computer vision to detect people in certain locations and understand if those people are wearing the right protective equipment to be in that location. All of those detections happen live.

and as those are happening, the knowledge base and database is filling up with this information. So now that we've asked what cameras do we have access to? We can ask, show me an aggregated data for PPE noncompliance over the last 3 months since the start of the year, from these cameras, right? So then this is going to show you all of the aggregated PPE noncompliance detections that the computer vision models made on the cameras and it displays it to you through an

interactive visualization within the same context. We don't need to switch contexts. We're still within the same platform and we're really speaking to just one agent.

So now we ask for a different type of data set from the observations, we start, we ask to see a chart of safety observation types for the last week, Monday to Friday, and this comes from all of those submitted photographs and text and audio and video notes from the field. So now it's, it goes into the database, analyzes the data, extracts what it needs, visualizes it for you within an interactive, uh, data visualization, and this is still building up the context of the same interaction with the platform. So now

we ask the agent to help me understand this data. I can see it, but how do I interpret it? What insights can I gain from the PPE noncompliance, the observations that start forms, and everything else that we have over the last 3 months or week or whatever.

So it'll come back and it will give you an interpretation of the data highlighting trends, anomalies, and anything that you might have missed or might not understand in visualizing the data itself.

We can go back into any data point and trace it back to the origin, the source document, the source video, the time stamp on the video.

and then of course we can, it will recommend actions that it can perform for you as follow-ups.

So

this I think is the point where it starts to get really interesting. So far we've dealt with data that has been ingested. It's data that's already there. Now we're getting into generative content. So here, based on the data that we've been talking about, scaffolding and PPE compliance, we asked the platform to create a toolbox talk, and if you don't know what a toolbox talk is, toolbox talk is a type of safety training, and it's a presentation, the safety teams give to job site teams to inform them

about better safe working practices based on typically data that they've collected over time. So if you see that your data is telling you there's an increase in PPE noncompliance in Zone B, then what you want to do, of course, is go and see who's working in Zone B and give them a contextualized and tailored training so that they know how to better work and more safely work in that in that area. So this has gone and produced that, uh, that training,

asset, um, and you have the opportunity to send that by email to someone else. So now it's going into a system of action downstream, always within the same platform.

Um, so these are just, you know, full toolbox talk. You don't have to write it. You don't have to present it. It's not prepackaged, it's contextualized and highly relevant to the current data that we've seen. And finally, I want to show you another task, which is the creation of a safe work method statement or a safety risk assessment. We've seen all this data, we've analyzed it. We've done a toolbox talk, but now we really want to do something structured and create a safe work method statement for scaff

old ing works. So we described the activity and you might get this, for example, from a work breakdown structure that's coming in from a subcontractor. They're describing the work that they need to do. You want to assess based on your company's safe operating procedures, whether or not that contractor is going to be performing that work according to your own standards, right? So now we have a full safe work method statement. If you're not familiar with these, I mean this is kind of what they look like. Typically they look much worse.

Um, and then of course, you have all the hazards, you have all of the different control measures for that activity. You can approve, flag, or reject, and that's part of the human in the loop, uh, review process where whatever you approve becomes a good result for AI to then learn from whatever you flag becomes something that someone needs to look at and correct. You might not be the expert that needs to correct it, or you might reject it completely, and that becomes a negative example for AI

not to repeat the same mistake again.

So now that we have the, the finished document. We ask AI and close the loop

Can you please put it back into Google Drive? And because it's connected to your systems of record, it can interact with those. Notice we didn't tell it the name of the folder. It assumes it based on what we're doing. We're doing a safe work method statement. I'll probably need to put it in the SWMS folder.

Yes, that is probably where you need to put it. So we just tell it to do so, and it finally uploads the PDF that exports it and uploads it back in the system of record closing the loop that I showed you before from System of records to platform.

to system of action.

So, back to the presentation.

What automation delivers? So if we treated these as individual point solutions. The start forms, the safety observations and maybe some of the analytics on an existing database. The you will probably get the same result without a platform approach, right? You could treat them independently and you would probably see something like this. You get 10x reporting volume. You get a 2 x near miss capture. The cycle time goes from 2 days from that team manually

translating paper forms into Excel goes from 2 days to 3 minutes, and that's probably the most important one because we're shortening the time from something that happened in the field and was reported to to the time when somebody actually does something to resolve that problem.

And of course, we get about 95% reduction in manual work through automation. These numbers are super impressive and leadership loves us for them, but this is nowhere near where the value is. The value actually comes from what the platform unlocks. So you don't just get automation. You have fragmented data on the left. You have the platform in the middle that takes the data, and ingests it, it extracts it, enriches it, classifies it, stores it at indexes it so AI can

read it and then it can generate new content on it, and it's all traceable and you can evaluate every single step of the, of, of the process. The result is not just automation. The result is this compounding effect where you're building institutional memory. You're enabling cross-system intelligence, predictive analytics, trend analysis, and deep auditability when something goes wrong.

You don't get this from Point Solutions because Pot Solutions permanently disconnect the left side from the from the right. You need a platform approach to be able to connect those two things and create compounding value over time.

So I've been talking about safety for this entire presentation, but the platform doesn't care about the domain. The platform cares about knowledge. It cares about data. It cares about orchestration. So we can extend exactly the same infrastructure, the same underlying platform stack to multiple domains, especially document heavy domains, manual workflows, and so on. So stuff like submittals NRFIs and comparing specs against requirements, quality and ins

pe ction workflows that involve collecting data on site and reporting it, procurement and logistics optimization and progress reporting, 4 different domains, very different domains, same underlying platform, and this is exactly how we work. We embed within a client's organization. We identify the first highest pain point, lowest effort, highest ROI use case that we can build quickly. We build it and then we build multiple use cases on top of that

where every use case compounds on, on the one before. So safety is really the entry point for this particular client, but the platform is horizontal, which means we can expand to multiple domains.

So in closing, I'd like to leave you with probably the most important lesson that we've learned so far, and it's as follows.

AI doesn't create durable value through better tools. It creates durable value when you own the intelligence that those tools produce when you on the data, when you own the knowledge, when you own the infrastructure. When you use a vendor's black box AI, the intelligence compounds, but it compounds inside their platform, not yours. When you buy disconnected point solutions, intelligence never compounds because the data behind never connects.

So we feel the best way is a platform first approach where you're able to build something that compounds over time and becomes an organizational asset, not just another tool.

So in 5 years, probably every major AEC firm in the world is going to be running some sort of intelligence layer across their operations. The question that I pose to industry and our clients is whether you want that intelligence to be your asset or somebody else's.

Thank you

Thank you, Kura. That was an amazing presentation and always nice to see uh finalized product. thank you.

So we have a, uh, at least one question from online, but, uh, first, if there's somebody with a request, we can go over here.

Thank you for your presentation. I just have a quick question about this, uh, your presentation beyond the traditional checklist of the Eur AI agent achieve proactive HFE risk detection and autonomous decision making.

Yeah, so that I would say mainly emerges through the live video stream, object detection and sort of people detection and understanding if, uh, you know, we can do things like is someone uh entering a prohibited zone? Are they wearing the right equipment? Are there too many people in a certain area? is a vehicle too close to a person? All of those types of real-time detections, I think, is where the sort of proactive and leading indicator, uh, game

starts to be played, but at the same time, because you're centralizing all of that data and you're creating not just separate databases, but a unified knowledge base.

The insights that can emerge from simply interacting and exploring that data is already orders of magnitude more insights that

typical safety teams have because they simply cannot access any of it.

And basically, we have a follow-up question for that is, how do you approach GDPR issues when you are taking that footage from the site and what else is taking from the footage and the obvious things. Yeah, so we don't host the platform.

We deploy the platform on our client's cloud. So in this case, the client is operating in the Middle East. We're running this on uh dedicated uh cloud instance in their region. The data is protected, and for every client we can do that. So we've built this platform not to be a, a product that you, that we sell through subscription. You can't just sign up. There is no sign up. There is no try me. We work with clients to be able to deploy this infrastructure so that they can

fully own it. We maintain it, we build on top of it, but they own the infrastructure.

OK, thank you. And uh one more time, big hand.

So, our next presenter will be Doctor Roxy Macanney. Hopeful I said it correctly now, and, uh, the topic is Beyond rework, predicting construction errors with AI.

Sir, good afternoon everyone. I hope you have enjoyed your lunch, and I'll try to keep it engaging and due to like despite the timing is post lunch. So actually, how I ended up being in AI and AEC despite my background, which is PhD in physical chemistry. Then when I realized that the whole world is pivoting to AI, then I feel urgency to move towards the eye and

then I earned another 2nd master in data science. So then I ended up being in construction. So actually, as you can see, we have a good like diverse team, so 3 of them in academia in Kingston University, and smart, very smart industrial partner. Jaundice is a, they are all mainly London-based 3 academics from Kingston University and Galliford Try as our industrial

partner. So just as a very brief summary that this is the project that I'm leading is

one of the most innovative project that uh try to actually apply cutting edge technology in industry. So this is why innovate UK, actually UK government tried to not stuck research at academia but also try to apply as a real impact in industry is how we, I ended up being in the project and I'm trying to be a liaison between academia and industry.

So

the

the next minute, uh, I'm going to show you what's the project, what was the research and just some reviewed the literatures and then data and modeling and results and then next uh impact and then future work.

So actually the research if you know about the research-based project, they are mainly into two categories. They are

could be primary or secondary. So this project is actually hybrid, so the secondary means we just try to look at the articles, what has been done, what's the result, and then just try to wrap up everything in a good like a structured table, but also in like in other terms like the primary is something that you also can develop and you can uh contribute into those research and come up with a new

idea. So this project is kind of hybrid, so we first have a look at what has been done so far, what's the gap, and how we can contribute and fill the gap.

So, oh sorry

And so this is started with exactly all the sessions in the morning that really resonated with me because from we know that the construction is fragmented data, all inconsistency, not good classification standard um

standardized actually framework and how we can apply this AI model or instead of creating solutions from vendors, how organizations can actually create instead of buying, how they can create themselves, although we know that these fragmented data is everywhere. There are data silos. There is no good standard framework, so before this research, uh, that you can see we've had uh actually another

published that uh we published in RCO Association of Construction Management in the UK that I presented in Dundee, and you can find the articles where I try to navigate between those classification system, how we can uh actually classify those uh errors and

the concept is come from that there is a still we know that the rework is still most uh prominent inefficiency in construction and how we can like um try to classify this error in a way that then we can apply some kind of AI models to predict those errors.

Then in my journey, I realized that, oh, there is no good classification system that how then I can like classify this data because there is no other way around that without having a good classification system, we cannot apply AI model. So this is that I come up with an idea of a hybrid model, uh, which is starts from top down. It's like experience domain is like by interviewing a survey

They are trying to classify errors into some uh like uh let's say like um classification type which could be a life cycle, root cause, error attack, and then there is a like a data-driven feedback loop, data enrichment I call it, then the data itself can come up with the classification system and uh it can then both together can classify

we can classify those data into a good classification system, and we call it taxonomy of error, and then you can find it in the RAM presentation, the whole paper.

but it's not only about that, it's just the start of the journey, but after like

uh having those classification systems, then we were looking out where the industry is in terms of rework and

and whether they are uh like in a very proactive approach, or they are all reactive and then we found out they all industrial and academia recognize the importance of errors in construction that lead to rework and as uh the previous presentation mentioned 5% of construction costs lead to uh reward, but uh it's actually lost because of reward, but

the Giri report, I'm not sure, are you, have you heard about Giri? Giri is an industrial partner in UK-based Get It Right initiative that reported in 2016 that 20 21% of construction costs is lost due to rework. So it's important that we have models to can like uh actually apply on those rework data to then predict uh this river, but the problem is when

we try to research on these papers, we found out that the majority of them look as a rework, as an outcome, so it's kind of reactive approach instead of being proactive and we'd be able to actually predict in advance why it happened and how likely it could be a caring future. So this is why we moved from being reactive to the rework which can, we can see the outcome as

in cost, quality time, but we are trying to model the errors that lead to rework. So this is how we differentiate between the previous research that has been done, and they use several models that you can see ANN uh Adabust and JB and Emil Adel classifier and some kind of let's say sophisticated models that use like ANN is neural network, but in our journey, we found out

that

this kind of sophisticated model doesn't need it. So first of all, we started with data. We started to looking out how many data we have in uh data in terms of error data. I mean by data.

So I found that

like my data is that I found I collected over more than 12 years in the industry in Galliford Try, but they are not like they no one use it in a way to kind of like predict

error and use it in the future in advance to like have a

good impact in industry. So also my data set includes

20 plus business units because it's a very large organization, Califor Troy, around all over the UK and so my dataset includes all these covers, all this business units. 1 million data records, so it's mainly quality incident records, but also like combination of like numerical pretexts and all categorical data and then 10+ project characteristics. It could be Projectoscope, project contract value, project duration, and then

uh 15+ error type, so what I tried to do actually, I tried to collect as much data as possible, and then I didn't want to sleep on it and then think about to what extent this data could be useful and then we can get rid of some of them and to what extent we can make use out of this data. So this is the process that all mentioned in the previous presentation that the data needs to be processed. And it was a very long journey.

I would say 12 years, sorry, 2 years of my project spent on data preprocessing, and it was a very long journey, very frustrating data cleaning, I mean, data collection, which is a very 6 months, then I started data cleaning, and I found oh is a very fragmented silos inconsistency, naming, standardization, and then I had to like do all of the process to make data ready in a point that yes is ready

for applying machine learning models.

So this is the journey that you can see, and yeah, after doing that, so this is a very sophisticated platform credit to Galliford Try that recently launched. I'm not sure, have you heard about Microsoft fabric. So how Microsoft Fabric work is a very sophisticated unified platform that you, if you can see Microsoft Fabric as a factory. You can have raw data as like raw material, then

at the end you have products, so there's your data is not going to anywhere, so there is no vendors. There is no other apps. It's all very unified platform that then you have, you can, you have one, it's called one lake. You have a structured unstructured data. You can save all of your data, store your data. There's a data governance in place built in fabric and then we have a fabric notebook, so there's no need to be

any anaconda for machine learning models or if you heard about Jupiter notebook, it's all integrated into fabric and it's called fabric notebook when we can machine learning model, and then there is a through API these 3 platforms, then we have the tool as Power BI, then we can predict everything, and then the product will be shown in Power BI for any end user, which is nontechnical, mainly design manager, technical manager user that they can dig

est this data in just very simple bar chart uh as they need it.

So

I'm just trying to

move. OK

Is it that one

Yeah. So after like

it was a very learned uh learning care for me to get to know how fabric works and how I can use like machine learning models and coding in data science synops and fabric, but it's

now I applied several machine learning models on this data, and I found out that actually construction construction data is not that sophisticated, and the thing is I'm coming from a science background, and we know that the science is about simplicity, not complexity, but the many people try to show off with some like as you see in research paper, ANN, CNN, but we really do we really need that, and I found

that, as you can see, logistic regression is a very simple model that works for construction data. Any vendors that suggested you, oh, we have very sophisticated data.

Let me tell you something. They are lied to you. We don't need that, and construction data is very simple data. I mean, I'm not talking about the image, I'm just talking about the text, PDF text. So very simple model can works very well, is interpretable, very simple, and then you can see that the accuracy is high. So when I try to use the very simple model, and I found that it works. So why do we need to go move forward? We can still, it still works and it's fine for me, so I also

use several other metrics but tried decision to and random forests, but I found that no, logistic regression works well, so I don't need to move further to move further to another sophisticated model. So this is why I just uh stuck at this model and it predicts well the errors and what we actually predict, we predict work package. I'm not sure. Have you heard about work package? Me neither, because I'm not a construction background, but I know what it is. So it's a package of work

to fix that error that happened in the construction, so I actually was able to predict uh what kind of packages of work is needed when like a project coming, what kind of error might happen, might likely to occur in the future, and you can see those kind of not naming is I use just code, it's unilass code. I'm not sure. Have you heard about UniClass standardization system.

but, uh, for like confidentiality of the data. I didn't like to write. What does the all of this code means, but this number, but you can search above the description, uh, if you are interested. And I also have um use ROC care, uh, I think I had like with Christopher I mentioned to you that because accuracy is not enough. We need to use ROC curve, as you can see this is the

uh Y axis is false, uh, is true positive versus nick false positive. It shows how well the model classify these categories. So yeah, and it shows that if it's like all left corner, it shows good the ideal model, but the diagonalal and this diag diagonal line is random, so it's not good to like take care of close to this line. It means that it doesn't, it's not good, but

the more care is the better.

So yeah, there are several benefits uh for Gallifer Try that uh not only operational but also technical and uh because I think I kind of overrun the time, but uh yeah, some kind of

we actually tried to be react be proactive in terms of providing sighting data-driven insight that if you're going to be building a project. What error might likely to occur in the future and what kind of work package uh is the highest like beds like decorating M&P, lighting, or this kind of mechanical and the UniClass code has its own star that which what are the highly risk error.

that then you can consider when you are building a building. And yeah, there was some kind of benefits that you can see, but these are future works. Actually I've already done some of them because when I drafted this presentation two months ago, and I've already applied, trialed this project in one business unit, and they were really interested and we are evolving the tool that I'm developing now, but yeah, there are other future works.

that uh needs to also consider like system stabilization and automation to the whole land like to cover all uh I'm just overrun. I cannot explain more, but yeah, you can read it. So

I talk a lot. Thank you and I hope you not get bored, and it's still not.

Oh, this is just some reference and let's connect. I would love to be connected with new more people and yeah, this is my LinkedIn and thank you so much. Thank you for listening.

Thank you, Dr. Makhani, and I was working with engineering company with the data. I see the struggle with the data quality every day. And uh, so if you have a question, we have time for one question. Yeah

I don't need a microphone. I'm here. Yeah.

Hello. Thank you for the presentation. I was curious, um, because you were doing the research embedded in like a very specific company, of course they do very specific building types and services and you know they'll have their own niche, I assume. So how, how does the, so let's say you spent, you said you spent 2 years on data preparation, right, for one company. So let's say you had to transfer this type of approach to another company. What, what's the sort of, is there any uh sort of knowledge transfer between models

that you can leverage to shorten that gap or that time I can transfer my skills that I've learned, especially working with British people, that kind of transferable scale. No, but

uh the thing I, I'm not British and it took for me a long time to be the male dominant British CEOs like all the school mentality. So, uh, yeah, but

first of all, we cannot because it's confidential and but the thing is, there is a BMS that humans, yeah, and we can definitely, I can definitely apply those skills, but

if Galliford try is ready to because I've already developed a tool. It's a very confidential tool to map and to standardize data in a very quick way, in a matter of seconds. So beyond this tool that I've developed, I developed another tool, extra tool I called for GT GT means Gelfotroy then they can map those data very inconsistent data in a very standardized way, but if GT is happy to commercialize the tool. I'm happy

to like get the IP, you know, and the intellectual property and patent, but it's all depends on Gallifari, whether they want me, they allow me to do that or not?

OK, thank you, thank you so much. And once, once for more pick a hand and when you have more questions, there's still breaks to come today, and you have time to meet with the talkers. So yeah, so time is going and I have to pay the time police. And so our next presenter will be Mr. Tommy Whitehead. You are president, CEO, author, and companies Tomco Solutions, right? That's correct. Yep, and you are

telling us how can we in the future when people will be retiring so we have all this at least in Western world there's like AIDS problem coming and you, you have some solutions for us. Yes, we're all getting a little bit older in this room, right?

Good afternoon everybody. I'm still on a little bit of jet lag. I am from the United States and Florida, and if you don't know where Florida is, it's where Mickey Mouse lives. I am the president and founder of Tomco Solutions. It is a regional residential construction firm, which is a little bit different than what a lot of us are talking here, but we all have the same mentality of how can we make AI better for the construction industry. And one central theme I'm hearing is the resiliency from our industry to adapt new technologies, or it can't do everything. Well, if I could get

half of my work done in an instant, I'd prefer to have 50% less work than still have the 100%. So we formed the AIBuilder company internally to create products to help us estimate much faster. And then we found out by talking to our other contractor in architecture colleagues. They're like, when can I buy that? And so we decided that we wanted to get into the space to start the to start the process of actually creating a minimal viable product for external use. Just a little bit quick, quick

quick about me. I'm a Titan 100. It's a networking organization in the United States. Tampa Bay Business and Wealth Apa G Award winner, finalist for philanthropist of the Year, Amazon bestselling author, podcast host, and then the mayors of my city is there on the very left of the screen. I'm a political appointee for a small business council to help integrate a little better with the, uh, local community. So no, I do not sleep.

OK. Trust is one of the biggest things I've seen in the construction industry, and I don't know about you guys, but I have the, the comments all the time. Well, a computer can't do my job. It can't swing a hammer. Well, you're right right now, although I saw some really cool tech in Las Vegas last year that might question that soon, but

we have 40% of the construction industry retiring in the next 5 years and are our country and we don't have enough people to fill those jobs. So that means I'm either out on a job site swinging a hammer or I was sitting at my desk reviewing plans. So which can I automate right now? And right now I can start automating takeoffs. If you have ever done an estimate, you know how arduous they are. It's repetitive. You might do 100 of them and land 3 jobs. It is just, it's just

a bottleneck everywhere. And so when we recognize that in our own field, in our own office, that the lead wasn't the problem, closing the sale wasn't the problem. It was the in-between time where we had to take and measure every fixture, every lineal foot, every square foot of drywall, everything in that house to make sure that we got that bid proper. That's where the bottleneck starts happening.

OK, just a quick show of hands. Does anybody here still use manual takeoffs? Using a ruler, you're using something kind of on a manual basis? No, because it's a tech conference, we shouldn't be. But we all do that a little bit, right? We can see I can do that faster than putting in the model. Um, has anybody tried any kind of AI estimating tools, Showhands.

OK, cool. That's actually more than I expected, right?

Who here trusts the AI results 100%.

Exactly, and we shouldn't. It should act like a stop measure, a gap, an intern. We might assign an intern, the measuring the perimeter of a field, but we're always gonna double check those measurements, right? Uh, and so we need to start looking at AI as a tool to get us most of the way there. Uh, you know, would you

if you had the option of either winning 25% of the lottery or winning none of the lottery, which would you take? You would take the 25%, of course you would. That's 25% more than you would have. That's more birthday parties we spend with our kids. That's more dinners out. That's more vacations.

We're a little

there we go

OK, I talked about that um retirement wave coming. My generation was told, go to school, don't get your hands dirty in construction. So we all went to college, graduated with debt, and then everybody had the exact same degrees, and nobody went to trade school. So in the United States I'm seeing plumbers getting the same rates as attorneys. $350 an hour sometimes just for plumbing, and they went to a small technical school or they got a trade license. Fantastic for them. We have a talent gap of almost half a million people needed. We're we're already out. We're already

past needing these people right now, um, and we're having a huge um

training problem. We can't get enough people in the schools to train them. We should have been doing this 25 years ago. And so now we're catching up

Where does our time actually go? You have to interpret the plans. You have to count each symbol if you have 300 light fixtures in a shopping mall. You've got to count each one of those light fixtures to do your schedule. Um, you have to make sure that any revisions that happen in the plans. You've got we've all had this, right? You have your full estimate ready to go and architecture come back and said, wait a minute, the client wants to insert all this stuff, and now you've got to go back and double check back and forth because that's always lots of fun. Double checking our quantities and then a lot of people still use the spreadsheet model

Some people are a lot of people are using more tech now, which is great. They're using like BlueBeam and other other things so they have a more concise estimation protocol, but for the residential sector they're not necessarily stepped up as much, and residential sector is huge in the United States. Um

takeoffs, that's the biggest thing. It's really counting, right?

It's quantifying the drawings. The steps we're not seeing out there, is it actually being able to quantify and immediately generate an estimate so that we can determine immediately how much would this cost?

OK?

Here's kind of the domino effect. We go from a takeoff to an estimate. We go from an estimate to our procurement. You're defining your costs. You start to schedule, you do your change orders, you get a profit. More change orders equals more problems, more costs. I get this all the time. You just want to change order me because you want to make more money. It costs me money to do change orders. I don't want to do change orders. I'd rather you not change your mind and just stay with the exact same project that we agreed to 6 months ago, but this is all time consuming. Imagine a click of a button where these things

change and all of a sudden you know all your figures and dollars and everything add up.

Um

complex drawings, highly detailed plans, can slow down the process. Frequent revisions we just talked about that. We've talked about labor shortages. I am absolutely shocked by the lack of intuitive nature of the construction industry software, and I think that's why we're all here today is that I feel like the construction of new straw software is pigeonholed into that 1980s, 1990s, never really updated to Think like Tomorrow. It's just kind of stuck and it's going to take our generation, this

group of professionals to fix that.

And then we have, you know, miscellanous misaligned stakeholder input, you know, calls the reworks, you know, Bob doesn't know what Jan doesn't know what Jake's doing because there's not centralized places. There's not centralized protocol. AI doesn't have that problem. It talks to itself. I do too sometimes, but um

I still see trust. I have the mentality when I talked about that retirement age, right? We have people in their 60s and 70s that have run construction firms very lucratively for their entire life. If you're 65 on the verge of retirement, do you want to learn a new skill or change anything? No. Well, that's the leaders in the construction industry in the United States is that elderly generation. I don't blame them. When I get to be 65, if you try to tell me something new, I'm going to be like, No, make it work. Give me my Nokia phone back. Where's my BlackBerry?

All right, um, a fragmented ecosystem. I do love that this conference is one of the few I've ever seen that bring this all together, because we're all having the exact same property problems, and this kind of is like a big group therapy session for us, you know, you're just as messed up as I am. Oh, nice, that's great. I'm not in this alone. There's training curves on new tech, which is changing with AI that can teach itself.

There's perceived cost barriers. We are further away from those accustom software packages that we used to see in the 90s. If you wanted workflows in the 90s or early 2000s, you're paying a firm $100,000 to come in and connect the interfaces that break the very next time the market shift changes. We're not seeing that anymore, and people are afraid of job security, but why? We don't, we can't fill the estimator positions now and a bunch are going to retire.

So there's that perception that it's just going to steal our jobs. It's not. Um

here's the public imagination that an AI is just going to immediately build a skyscraper, you know, we're all fired and this hotel just grazes from the ground with these cool robots. We are not in the Star Trek slash Star Wars era of construction. We won't be in our lifetime, but we can reduce our time. I actually saw some cool robotic technology that does that. Um.

what AI does is it sees things that we don't see, those minuscule patterns that we don't necessarily know about, and it can pick up on these little minute details.

RAI can actually help estimators do symbol detection and plans. It can locate the legend in a plan, read the items, and then scan and visually detect those. I'm actually going to show you a first gen draft, and I'm going to tell you about the second gen of the software we have coming out or where we're developing. Um, pattern recognition across trades and drawings, you know, the symbol for an electrical outlet is pretty similar everywhere. It might be different for a different voltage or amperage. Automated quantity counts. You know, the number of toilets in a shopping mall. We go back to

something like that or a locker room and a number of shower heads. It can revise immediately and it can help with workflow.

OK, here's how our model works, and again this is an internal model that we want to develop out. We can upload a PDF or CAD file. Um, what happens is the computer version visually detects these features. Its natural detection to go through, identify the legend, identify the notes, and count those quantities off.

Um, a human reviewer is still necessary, and that's the biggest misconception is we're just going to feed in AI and it's going to screw up our entire firm and the C-suite has that fear that nobody's actually going to do their job. No, we're going to do our job

but we're gonna double check it after the AI does its job, instead of doing those menial tasks and counts.

It increases precision

Um, it is more accurate than humans. It doesn't get tired. Imagine running cost estimation on 50 of your projects as you go to bed, you just click it and it's good to go. Um, it obviously reduces time and it avoids the rework.

Takeoff speed can be increased, increased significantly. Human oversight is still essential, and I can't stress that enough. and standardized components are so much easier.

OK, this is first gen tech. We've already gone to the next generation of this, but this is just a visual detection piece.

Start by uploading your pricing data.

Next, upload your construction plans.

And this is using a PDF in this example. Then simply crop section in the residential sector, a lot of contractors don't actually get a hold of the CAD files. It's the engineers are architects that maintain custody of those co files. Our system automatically analyzes your blueprint. And this is a simple floor electrical plan.

Right now it's comparing it to a predefined cost database that we uploaded based on client spec. So you can see it's automatically detected all the items now and it's come up with a bill of materials and precise. Now, obviously these are fake numbers. I'm not going to get a full electrical redo for, you know, a couple 100 bucks, but what it does, are a couple 1000 then right now this first gen would actually even export into Excel, which you can generally upload into any of your estimation platforms to match what you're finish is.

Our newest version of this actually reads reaches into AutoCAD and Revvit and pulls every element that's independently identifiable out, uh, does a summation on everything and compares them to a cost database. So imagine your architect, imagine you are an architect. Somebody asks how much is that going to cost? Most architects say, I don't know, so this is the GC. Imagine, hey, for an extra couple $1000 I can give you an approximate cost estimation with the scope of work directly summarized for your GCs to start reviewing.

Would you like to know when you go to your GCs that this is probably going to be $2000 or $500,000 or $7 million. It's an extra revenue side just for architects for doing no additional work, and it creates additional files that is much easier for a GC to bid to know that, hey, the national average for Windows is $700 but in the United in Florida, it's $1000 because they need to be impacted so you can make your changes accordingly.

We want to get this to doing full stacks, all MEP.

Every time you see something on a plan, we want to be able to detect it and analyze it.

Um, we talked about the CAD. We want to talk about spatial analysis. There's so many different ways, and I've seen some texts here that other people are using that will start integrating into this, um, and then we want to get into automated revision detection so that it can grab that first file that you've finished, but it can take your revisions, analyze them, and say, oh hey, you just reconfigured a bathroom, but your quantity counts are still the same.

Couple other things that we're doing in construction. We try to be a tech forward firm.

Um, we're developing AI chatbots right now uh for natural language inquiries, hello, I'm, I'm Bobby Sue, and how much does a kitchen cost? Oh, will it cost between this and this, depending on what that is. Um, hi, I'm, um, my name is Grandma and my sink broke. What do I do? Providing an automated assistant lines for elderly individuals at no cost to them but could lead to Legen in the service industry. Um, automated qualification qualification of leads, phone triage.

you know, um, I'm writing prompts now that write their own prompts to program Zapier interfaces and AI chatbots, which I named after my cats. Nobody knows that, but when they call in, you're either getting Emma or Edgar.

There's always a concern here, and this is the point of this conference is that AI scary.

Imagine how scary the automobile was to the horse and buggy.

right? It changed

We still have those people, they still work. Imagine, like, let's get into this, you know, uh, century. Imagine the internet versus the newspaper. I read an article about Montgomery Ward, used to be the number one retailer because they were the first ones to put things in a calendar or in a catalog and then mail them free of charge to residents in the United States, and they made it one of the largest companies, but they refused to early adopt the internet, and that was, that's what crashed them.

So by being in this room, by being in this conference, I think we're the early adopters. They're going to be well ahead. We're not going to be the Montgomery Awards that refuse to adopt the future. We're taking the risk now

to go to the next step.

AI augments us, it doesn't replace us. We don't have androids like Lost in Space coming around to do things. Um, we can boost our output, we can cut our repetitive effects. We can support scaling in multiple industries.

And, uh, feel free to connect with me. We are doing a stage round for our construction slash AI company and we also looking for partners or integrations if you have tech that you think would work well with this. Uh, we could potentially be looking for other partners to come in and connect. So with that, I appreciate your time today. Any questions?

Yes. Thank you, Tommy

So yeah.

question here

Again, really nice to see a product that is in use, yes.

Uh, thank you so much, Tommy, for the love representation. It looks quite good.

Uh, 11 of my questions is that when you talk about trust and you talk about the quantities and take AI as an intern. So in construction projects we might have hundreds of those quantities. So how does your AI try to detect that which quantities should we double check because if we are double checking all the quantities, then basically we have rendered it like useless. So, and if the AI itself tells us that OA, these might be inaccurate, then we can't

be sure because AI can be a compulsive liar. So how do you tackle with this problem? It can be a compulsive liar. It's a brat sometimes, right? OK, how do we do this already though? Let's think about this. Why are we reinventing the wheel and thinking about that. If you walk into a local retail store, do they inventory every product on the shelf every day. No, what do they do? They pick one item and they spot check it.

When have you ever, if any of us have ever worked retail when we were kids, right? Have you ever had somebody come up in the cash store for you younger people, cash is what we used to use to pay for things. Um, have you ever had a supervisor come up and say I need to audit your cash drawer, open your till. They don't do it to 50 people on the floor, they do it to 1. So you have to have kind of internal mechanisms that will be different to every company, but some of them are going to pay attention like, if you know you have 5000 toilets in a 2000 square foot office building, you know, that's an error. So that's where

human knowledge comes in and plays, Hey, there is a quantity that busts out of the seams here. This is just way off. We need to double check this. It's also with the cost, you know, many of us know that this particular type of project might cost roughly between this and this a square foot. If I'm seeing way out here or way too low, I had another tool I tried to use from somebody else, and it was saying the renovation cost would be about 50% of what it actually costs. My professional knowledge looking at a total dollar amount knew that the whole thing had to be wrong. So yeah, it's spot checked,

but it'll get better and then there'll be bots that check the bots, and then we can just go home because everything will be taken care of.

Thanks. OK, thank you. Uh, we will have to go to the next one. So thank you, Tommy, and uh use the time after this to get these discussions again with the presenters, and I will uh kindly remind you that you can put your questions into the platform, so we will during the presentations already so we can then have it ready.

So, uh, so next topic is coming up. Um, oh my God, those topics are long. AI here, right?

Not really. A prick a prick vision driven human robot cooperation for Economic Bricklaying, that is actually super interesting. So let me get this right because from Italy again, so Professor Pier Paolo Rotico. Perfect.

Hello, and thank you for the invitation.

This conference is uh amazing. It's my

probably 5th time that I attend. So today, uh, I'm, I'm just a researcher actually. Uh, so today I'm going to be talking about things that doesn't work, so I don't have to sell anything, just the journey that we are doing, um, it's uh index lab is a lab that I founded in 2010 dealing with computational design and robotics and now uh

AI is coming into play and uh we were noticing that AI can enable many, many application layers and so we are trying to apply AI at construction with robotics, and today I'm going to be talking about a project done of course together with my team we are just 9 people. Um, but, uh, we, we collaborate with, with companies in general to to make some real stuff. I mean, we really

wanna uh go to market, uh, at some point.

So, uh, in this, uh, uh, in this era, we are facing a very urgent problem, which is the labor shortage, so from the literature we read that most of the companies are are just looking for uh people brick layer like, like this uh otherwise buildings are not getting built, and this is why this is because mainly bricks

are heavy. I mean

15 kg up to 20 kg payout, so we need basically uh people that uh whether there are strong enough, but even this doesn't, doesn't help. I mean there are musculoskeletical disorders that are um that are the main problem, especially in in the EU. So, uh, the industry is actually moving also forward, so there are really great

available solution already like this one, Adrian X is a great example and for instance this is teaming up with Wiennaberger, which are producer of bricks all over the world.

and basically, uh, uh, they're trying to build houses out of it, but uh maybe uh not houses yet because the houses are small and very highly customized, so those solutions that you see there that are already available on the market are very useful for uh one story building with a lot of uh uh square footage and pretty much straight walls.

So, um, this is it, basically, uh, but he started many years ago. We, we can see here from the literature, some, some images from prototypes in the 90s, back in the 90s. So the the concept was still there at that time, but it's uh it's the adoption is very hard.

And it's very hard uh for many reasons. So now I'm trying to go through those reasons and in order to introduce what we are bringing to the site thanks also to AI. So here you see two solutions. One is mule, which is a machine which is pretty much manual machine, so it helps uh lifting uh uh paraom bricks, and the other one is Walter, a very new application from

Linersberger startup that is placing bricks two at a time, but as you see here, there are a very heavy, uh, machinery, so they, they require cranes for for placing them in the construction site, and they're, I mean, such a big machine to wastes even more than 1 ton. So also for if you think of residential building of 2 kg Newton slab, you cannot place it.

at height. And so, uh, they are limiting the possibility to adoption in the in the wide market which is mainly especially in Europe, made out of very small and customized project. And so, uh, there's there's a risk and the risk is that the machine constraints and the constructual logistic dictate design.

and not the other way around. And so we, we don't want that because as architects we want to express ourselves and be free with the design. So oftentimes these machines constrains us and this happened already. I mean, think of the 60s and 70s with the prefab, they put the crane in the middle of a tower, and they used to build, you know, very tall building out of the crane radius. So this is limiting so much the design possibilities. So, so we need to

find other solutions and so in our lab, uh, we, we, we started testing by observing what is happening in the construction sites, which usually in construction sites there are very small doors and a worker works uh one next to the other and so uh big robots cannot fit and actually they are very difficult to to fit inside and most of it, most of all, it's high variability, so all the projects are

different, so you have to, you know, be flexible enough to adapt to those environments.

So here's the uh our setup in the lab.

at index Lab in LEO we have a bunch of robots, both industrial robot and collaborative ones, and for every need, basically we collaborate with companies to get the most updated machine to work with, and we are working hybrid between augmented reality system and competitional design to robots in our algorithmic and customized way and so we try to embed the

design constraint into the fabrication directly with a streamlined workflow and of course here you see problems of course arising because when you are when you are dealing with a heavy rubble like this, you have safety issues, so you cannot work side by side with the robot unless you rewrite the regulations and maybe you wear some jacket with active feedback, and we are investigating on that or

you are creating some uh some uh uh let's say, um, mechanism with the robot through the software to slow down the speed when the operator grows close to the robot, and we are investigating also this, but it's, it has to come altogether, you know, with the regulation, with the uh feasibility and the robustness of software. Also that needs to be robust enough to hold this and uh

uh but uh there, there's where we, uh, basically in 2018 we started to play a little bit with supervised learning and, and, and here with the reinforcement learning, we were creating some uh games through Unity, just having fun, basically, uh, to because we thought we were very ambitious. Let's see if an agent can build a building itself, so it was the time

where, where everybody was AI actually generative AI was not there yet, but there was a lot of, you know, in the, especially in the academia, a lot of passion about reinforcement learning at that time.

And uh yeah, uh basically we had a lot of fun. We, we experimented with this method where an agentic can can basically any agent can actually build a wall faster than a human because it embeds the trajectory and and then everything is applied to the robot as a consequence of that, and there's also a little bit of interaction between human gestures and robotics, so we are kind of playing with technology basically

we are nerd. Uh, the next move was to um to transfer this into uh a system and this was the first prototype we did BRICS, where basically we integrated all these technologies together and this was very primitive, almost, I mean, almost all didn't work out very well first because

you'll never find in a construction site a pallet like this where all the elements are perfectly shaped. So here the robot is is going next to the pallet and he's scanning this QR code and it's basically the QR code will create a calibration plane for the robot to pick exactly the, but this is it works only on an ideal uh setup with uh I say not a construction site

It's very, very hard in a construction site like this and also the robot was the rover was pretty sophisticated because it navigates autonomously and there are more and more rovers that navigate autonomously, but as you see here, we are constrained in height, so the robot it's sticks to this platform, but the platform is, uh, the robbery is to, uh, too big for a construction site because it doesn't go through doors. It's one

2 m

So that's the problem we are not solving our problem, you know, uh, so

so we had to somehow uh put the human in the loop and make things easier so we were probably too ambitious at the beginning, so we just resize everything down to this scale, which is a very simple system basically that picks uh uh ari from a pallet and it it it it brings it nearby where it should go, and it's not any obstacle avoidance is done by hand.

I mean, it's a

we'll borrow that uh you can easily transport and download, but this is exactly the purpose we want to reach. So first of all, make it it easier for the brick layer to operate and then uh make it faster, basically to calibrate. So in this case, we added the AI into the vision system, so it has a machine vision system that basically scans where the the the brick is

and goes there and picks it, and it brings, brings it there

uh where the operator does the dexterity part where he's good at, you know, because in the previous examples, um, it was not a perfect match. So with this system, this evolution we call it bricaria, which is also the title of this system. Uh, we, we reached our goal, which is to basically go through doors 80 centimeters door and we can, uh, we

can load it on a van, so there are no cranes needed, so it's very cheap in the end, and this lowers the barrier also for very small companies that can afford something like that. So, um, and, um

uh, and everything is um done with off the shelf component. So basically it's a proposal that doesn't invent anything. I mean, there's nothing uh special regarding hardware because it's integrating various hardware um that are

readily available, but this was actually our scope the scope to, uh, for this to be mass uh

developed. So basically, uh here you see Robert, a collaborative robot, so the collaborative is better than an industrial because it's much lighter and it stops when you, when, when it touches the humans and then it's for legs, very cheap and um

yeah, and the total weight of the system is just 150 kg, so it can really go to any type of slabs.

and uh it can reach up to 4 m height because of this column and it's quite stable apparently so is I must say that it works and um and uh but uh uh the most important thing is that uh it's a called a human machine collaboration to avoid muscuskeletal skeletical disorders and also it becomes an inclusive uh system because it allows, for instance, women to become

bricklayers in the future, so it's not replacing humans, but it's to help them, and you see the the end factor has an ergonomic um geometry that we designed and produced and and the sensor camera, depth sensor uh camera that basically scans

uh as a software architecture, we are using uh available and open source platforms and uh and models like uh segmenting anything by meta, um, and then we use the Nvidia Foundation pose, uh, for, um, for putting the, the, the vector, the, the calibration plane uh for the robot to be the objects, and we are embedding all in microservices in Docker.

so everything can be scaled and this is the pipeline overview. So first is the scan, so the robot approaches the palate and scans it with a, with a kind of a

uh um a spiral mode so he can, he can see like human would do, and then there's a same to that isolate the clay blocks from the background, and this is done in real time.

And then the foundation pose estimated the 6th degree of freedom of each visible block, and then there's also a part which still remains computational. Grasshopper, uh, that simulates basically all the uh all the uh pick and place for the robots, which is built row by row and block by block, and then the collaboration part where basically there's an interaction between the human through input output

Basically that's uh goes into, into the workflow to stop the robot and make it a lock the Z basically of the robot. Uh, so this is the uh how the, the setup of the uh the wall is divided into

into parts that are for, for, for, for making the process easy to make, of course we need to separate the block into this segments and um uh we did uh many tests, uh, but not many, uh, enough test, uh, to, to check this cycle and those numbers are 2, so we were recording how much time it takes to do this.

operation and just to get an overall idea. Uh we did always the same test to to place one brick for it's multiple times to see if we were good enough and software was good enough, and we see the blue and and, and, and the yellow that are the two main bottlenecks, which is moving the the the the rover basically manually, so this takes time because every time you have to, you know, shift it in the next place for the next block, and so, uh

this can be announced if we scale it up with a motorized autonomous rover, of course, but it costs more. And the other one is the the scanning, the scanning still requires time, but we use the normal PCE, so this can certainly be improved by computational power, so it will be done in real time with so we can even lower the barrier, but, but, but this is, is pretty, uh, I mean, it's

it's pretty performative, and he's the diagram of the human in the loop basically which is half, half, half softer and half interaction. So like once again, uh the, the, the, the scope here is to make an application level of AI that enables new type of profession, which is the brick laying of new generation, and this we believe will attract also uh women intelu hopefully, and it's a, it's a, it's a new possibility for

the construction industry, and this is, I think, believe, uh, thanks to AI for the machine vision with this regards that unlock the potential of this, and I finished with this slide which is kind of a roadmap for the future where we see

of course, uh, uh, lots of other technologies emerging like humanoids. We are in the phase of investigating also this, and so yeah, that's room for improvement, of course, and a lot of innovation to, to happen. Feel free to visit us or contact with me here. Thank you.

Thank you, Pier Paolo. Uh, I have one question right away because I saw in the pictures that the blocks always stayed the same. The blocs like the bricks stayed the same and the future pictures also, but did you have any ideas on if those robots would be there working to change the material a little bit or somehow, absolutely. There are so many tech evolution happening, for instance, the BRICs will become more and more heavier and stratified with also

the finishes applied that's the, the future will have more complex components probably that are already finished maybe with different shapes and there's there's a 3D printing also into the future. So uh blocks could be customized and so uh I see a great potential for the future for integrating all these technologies.

Yeah, exactly. So nobody is breaking the bricks there anymore. They will come exactly the right side into the place. Any other questions from the audience?

OK, so thank you, thank you so much.

And uh, so the one or final presentation of this room, uh, will be presented by Ms. Carolina Alatano. She's an architect at all Engineering.

and uh uh topic is uh future of organization in construction management, hybrid human technology AI teams. So I bring teams with AI agents, probably or something like that. Let's see.

I guess this is

hello. My name is Carolina Attalla. As I said, and uh I come from AIDS group, I as in aid, and yes, I'm an architect, but I work as a project engineer and I work in development team and also in project work.

So.

both worlds. Today I'm going to talk about our uh research and development project, uh,

High five that has a long name meaningful industrial work in hybrid human technology AI teams. And uh it's, there's our partners in there. There's Conak cranes and Elomatic, for example, so that's the industrial work and there's also the meaningfulness as an aspect, but mostly we are piloting future working methods where AR tools and AI assistants are essential

part of the project management team.

So, uh, our research questions include what it means for efficiency, teamwork, management practices, so developing new forms of working. What does it mean? And how would this hybrid teams essentially work and we are also focusing on the construction sites and offices because right now they are a bit apart.

uh

we have a lot of technological development and it really forces us to rethink this, this, these things.

uh

we can't just stay still.

and

I trust that everyone here knows what an AI agent is. I will get into that, but then we have multi edge systems and then hybrid teams when human comes into this.

structure or team.

and what is a hybrid team. It didn't have a definition that we have made one. It's a multifaceted workgroup combining human collaboration with autonomous AI systems and technologies such as AR and robotics, and it uh offers us scalable team structures, the AI agents can call and a lot of more AI agents. It's seamless collaboration regardless of location, it's real data's

uh real-time data collection, problem solving additions and making and the team of risk can also operate independently.

and

we all know that the AI agent is not like one more software or program we can use. It's more. What will it be like your human colleague?

shown there or will you be working alongside with the AI agents performing one task, or are you giving tasks to a multiple AI agents or it's an AI agent giving you tasks.

And what I said about earlier, the AI agents usually have more AI agents behind them. One orchestrating.

the rest

But also, as I said about the construction sites, we can't forget those. AI agents are in the virtual world and there's the physical world, world, which is the construction sites. So then robots

when essential, essentially they come into construction sites.

And we also, uh, thought about what roles we have right now, and this should be quite fami familiar to you?

Uh

this one and we thought, uh, what is missing and we have talked about

today and yesterday about

AI needs data, and right now I don't think we have anyone at ICE Group that handles only data that their role is specifically gathering data, but in the future, we need someone to collect all the data, standardize it, correct it, have it functioning, converting it to a machine readable format. That's a lot of work and that maintenance roles, coordination

rules, bringing the data into our processes.

and somebody, uh, to teach us how to use those. And finally, we have an AIlu maintenance and AI developer.

roles

and some examples what I AI agent could do if we have seen this, uh, doing our offers, handling our data, analyzing our data, training us or scheduling our calendars and some of the robots, they could be measuring things, uh, drawing markings on construction sites or logistics robots, for example.

And then the rules will be changing, uh, but there's um different kind of change in unor role and expert role.

So first, Junior role is usually someone who has just graduated and they are given assisting and repetitive tasks, and we all know AI is good at those things or better than humans. So a junior role will be more focused on AI solutions and the technical integration on that and understanding that when AI gives you answers that it's like it's not correct that you understand the mechanics behind that. So

more of a tech technical change. But then on expert roles who are doing more demanding projects and solutions are more specialized projects. They're all

it's, it's changing to that direction that the human interaction will be more important, understanding what the client wants, what AI solution is best for them and working, it, it's a different uh change, but none of those are going, going one way.

And then uh we looked at this change from project engineers and project managers and site supervisors perspective.

First, project engineer who is led by this project manager, and they have like

how many are there AI agents there are 3 my example.

They are using AI to create documentation or gathering data. They give tasks to this AI agents using them as probably like tools or assistants. But then project manager who is already leading this human, which is AI, uh, the project uh engineer, but also they will have 2 or 1000 AI agents to be led, and that is a different kind of work to lead

AI agent or a human. Uh, so it will be changing. And also their project manager is

using the AI agents for their work. Those are like leading those and then site supervisor on construction sites will be with robots and interacting with those. So how does that work?

uh in the future.

And then about the structures of these teams organizations.

Uh, this is a traditional structure, this project director. They have their support people and all of these experts doing their thing like the project manager.

Now we are maybe here with just advanced that everyone is given an AI agent. Now they can be more efficient.

but it's an add-on

and this is what everyone is afraid of in the future that uh AI agent will replace somebody's job.

but maybe it will be more of a replacing a tasks from every one of those experts, one part of their job.

It's not so scary maybe.

But

these are add-ons.

Should we

rethink the structure

This is now made for humans, leading humans.

with AI agents kind of for so much more.

Then I have talked about this hybrid teams, more theoretical, uh, this is one of our proof of concepts, this remote expert concepts, and if you have been on our stand, there's this smart glasses that you have could be trying.

Uh, so this is a pair of two people, uh, that's the one with the smart glasses, and they have their helmet on. Uh, it's a smart glasses, goes around your head, and there's a camera, thermal camera, and this little display here and you can watch it like a computer screen and there's also display and they can take video and talk to the classes they are speech, um, you can take

picture and it will take a picture

and this operator here can be at home and they are like on a team's meeting, remote meeting with the smart glasses user. They can see everything that the smart classes your there is saying or doing.

and they, the remote operator can add, for example, the client who is from a different country or designers who are from another side of Finland or for example,

and

yeah, that's the concept. And

usually on construction sites, there's a problem and it needs, it needs to be fixed fast, and there's no time and cost will and then

with this, uh, there's the site supervisor, they can put this on and call the designer who is needed and

we can all see how it's more efficient.

But as you can see, this is not a hybrid team yet.

Um, this was phase one, whereas human human and we are using technology with in phase 2, the operator could be an AI agent.

Um, in this phase one, we are trying to figure out what the smart glasses uses are on construction sites needs. Does it need to see on the litter screen a beam model? Is it the latest plans? Is it whatever it is, or does they need uh information of some sorts, or is it just, OK, like that, uh, but the AI agents

on, uh, the opera dashboard, they offer the opportunities bought by AI. They, you're going to ask them everything and they know and they can also call the client and add them on the remote meeting, and they can make

also with the glasses already made, uh, workflows or task list, like take a picture of that and that and go forward.

So this is the remote expert. You can try our glasses. They are on our stand with us.

And I could talk about this way more, but let's continue.

um

how this hybrid teams can reject the contrast construction industry. Uh, we all know that it will be a big change, but how

Um

roadmap and the short term is uh I5 has been started on 2024, so then there's

25 there.

But these years we are going to make the foundation for our uh digitalize or supported construction organizations are investing in technology skills, doing pilots, um, getting the AI supported information modeling on going and

having intelligent situational picture of the projects and using AI to benefit in just in time logistics and cobots will be slowly coming on the construction sites.

And on medium term, we are scaling this intelligence scaling of intelligence and coordination.

uh

for planning our supervision or using AIs assisted digital twins, which enable anticipation of optimization and uh

they combine combine design, procurement, and implementation into a unified whole.

and

they are AI agent support teams by automating information flow and providing continuous analytics, so everyone knows what is happening on the construction sites at all times. And um

the coordination between project parties significantly improves and it's reducing waste and lowering costs and shortening project durations.

and long term, we are now on the 2030s, uh, cyber physical systems and hybrid work, so this hybrid teams uh will be here on more prominent and the code development of AI robotics and IoT enable us real-time feedback loop with between the physical and digital worlds. And the semi-autonomous robotic systems can have an evening shift that the

construct ion work is continuing regardless if it's a day.

and they can do more of this autonomous robotic systems that are dangerous tasks and more accurately than humans.

and

projects and constructions that are guided by sensor data and these hybrid teams are sharing tasks according to the situation.

and people can focus more on what they want, more innovation, uh, and high value added work.

Uh, the construction project systems are radically safer, faster, a higher quality.

and it's a system that learns and develops continuously.

And there's there's bonus which is like 30, 30.

3 plus and it's designed for robotics and AI focusing on key moments. So this language models have surpassed the doctoral level expertise and projects have thousands of days in years. Um

and AI-driven robots are able to operate autonomously on construction sites.

Um

and the duration of design process is measured in ours instead of months, and the focus on key moments where decisions are made. So human makes that decisions either way, and design quality improves because there's more design alternatives and uh

uh the time spent on design, uh, drops to a fraction. And plans data and site organization are supporting AI and robotics, um

uh, the projectivity multiplies and project duration drops to a fraction of the current and

there's the the designing a construction designing and construction and apartment building doesn't take 2 years but maybe a month in illustrates the scale of potential.

and then we have a question at the end, what is your organization's role in this development? Is it a pioneer enabler, while a follow follow where.

Thank you

Thank you, Carolina. That was uh nice and it seems that, uh, future will be different from, right? So my question right away is that where is the biggest friction going to be? So what is the most challenging thing to get this implemented, this kind of future.

I think it's

mm like the remote expert concept. I think it's hard to get some anything kind of technological on construction sites. I think it's, it's uh one thing, but getting the, as I said, the whole structure of these teams could, would need to be changed, and that is always hard.

on construction field. So yeah, I think in never feel this really uh difficult to change people, right?

So, uh, is the questions in the audience?

OK, over them

Hello, I'm Yoshi Savalainen from Tampa University of Applied Sciences and uh because I came from uh the education sector, uh, I would like to hear your opinion about how will people be able to learn all these new skills and competencies. There are lots of new roles and lots of new tasks and lots of new technology and things. What do you think? How will this happen?

Yeah, that's a good question.

I think that the educ education like the universities or temporary applied sizes, they might need to come forward and acknowledge that AI will be not just in construction, but maybe in every field.

there should be more teaching of AI and technical things because right now it's uh from my studies in architecture, we had a technical things.

very little

So definitely more of that but um of course you learn from, from jobs, uh, obviously, and then you have the personal interest and now it's um possible to like Google or chat with Chachi BT, and it will train yourself a notebook a alam you can put everything you want in there and train yourself but I think it's a bigger problem that

I could just manage on my own. Maybe we elaborated later. Thank you very much.

OK, so, uh, time for one more question, Mr. uh, if not, thank you, Caruana. Thank you so much. And um

I think this was the last presentation in this room, in this event, so I want you to know this that people who are working back there and making this technology happen to us and be can for them also.

So coffee break before the and notes.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

AI in AEC 2026's "Session 11: Construction" showcased the transformative potential of artificial intelligence in the construction industry, featuring six speakers who explored diverse applications of AI, robotics, and hybrid teams. Guido Maciocci introduced ACOS, an AI operating system tailored for architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) firms, emphasizing its features like connectors, ingestion pipelines, intelligent document processing, knowledge bases, orchestration, automation, and human-in-the-loop review. He highlighted the importance of vendor-neutral platforms that integrate native AEC data to enable compounding intelligence across projects. Roxi Mkhani presented her research on predicting construction errors using AI, leveraging 12 years of data from 20+ business units and 1 million records to develop proactive error classification systems that address inefficiencies caused by rework. Tommy Whitehead showcased his AI tool for automated takeoffs in residential construction, capable of symbol detection, pattern recognition, and automated quantity counts, significantly reducing bottlenecks in estimating processes. Pierpaolo Ruttico demonstrated lightweight bricklaying robots equipped with ergonomic end-effectors and AI vision systems, designed for human-machine collaboration to address labor shortages, improve inclusivity, and reduce musculoskeletal disorders. Karoliina Alatalo explored hybrid human-technology AI teams, presenting a comprehensive roadmap with short-term, medium-term, long-term, and extra-long-term goals for integrating AI and robotics into construction workflows. She also introduced the remote expert concept, utilizing smart glasses to connect site supervisors with remote operators for real-time problem-solving, enhancing efficiency and communication between construction sites and offices. The session highlighted AI's ability to revolutionize construction through collaboration, efficiency, and innovation, paving the way for safer, faster, and higher-quality projects.

Speakers

GM

Guido Maciocci

-

AECFoundry

KA

Karoliina Alatalo

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

PR

Pierpaolo Ruttico

-

INDEXLAB - Politecnico di Milano

RM

Roxi Mkhani

-

Kingston University London

TW

Tommy Whitehead

-

TomCo Solutions

AV

Arto Väisänen

-

Sweco

================================================================================
SESSION 15: Closing Session
================================================================================

--- LIVE TEXT ---

And to um Helena from the last um session from the from from the other room because

architects, artists have always driven technology. Probably it's also the mindset of creativity, but I would like to

take you a little bit in the history in my personal history before we start with the actual talk.

because what did I do in 2020?

Um, I was actually working for interesting architects in internationally known and complex architecture and I've seen a lot of um a lot of

cat environments where we thought that technologies is arriving that will last. In this case, you see a fargo arm where we digitized um just normal models uh into rhino 1.0, so this was the start of rhino actually and um

14 years later, actually it was then built, and this was something

OK, I, I'm not changing the DR for a second. Good.

Now.

OK, and then also in the, in the, in the year 2000, there was another project with Colin von Nant and Peter Cooks for the first Peter Cook building in Graz and here also the problem was how to actually uh digitize this physical scaled model into the cat environment. Can I change?

Sorry, it's just now.

Who's driving it? Yes, I am driven

OK, now, it looks

good, but the notes are really big and I can't whatever. I just do it like I always do it. OK, um, then in the year 2010, all of a sudden a new like.

half of us divided. One part jumped on BI and I jumped on industrial robotics in the year 2008, as everybody can remember, there was this car crisis and all of a sudden you could get

used robots just out of the shelf for the price that we were actually buying 10 years earlier, just desktop computers, and sometimes if new technology is available, then you can actually work and do new things, and what we did in the Association for Robots in Architecture is we were just combining with algorithmic modeling that was developed by David Rutten in Grasshopper and what was interesting for us, we

were total novices. We had no idea about robotics, but we could actually simulate and visualize and we got what we actually saw, and that's a little bit different to what is going on now in AI that very often this is in the background and you don't see what you get, but in this case, obviously we wanted to incorporate experience in

2012, we found some genetic algorithms and just to ask our system where to best place the workpiece in front of the robot so that the robot can be as efficient as possible.

The other interesting part that we also heard in this conference is community building. This was something that just happened that uh Cuer PSA uh PRC really got spread into the world, so nowadays we have around 1, 1.5 million downloads per year just online users, and what we also realized that these users came out of architecture school and instead of buying

a car in the garage that's just bought robot and started prototyping and a lot of new startup scenes started, uh, with, for instance, branch technology, but also if you know Stuttgart, nowadays and also construction industry created new business models just due to the new tools they had.

What is quite a good

uh in or interesting part from us because it was an online platform. We also understood who were the users, and this is the good news today also for you because this is just the same that we see nowadays, do not underestimate the digital use.

You just let them do their work. You do not have to control them. You can realize that people who are in my age, like in the mid-50s, 0.7% are interested in robotics. I mean, I'm still interested in robotics.

but, um, actually the CEOs who are the decision makers, they are the ones who actually are scared of new technologies, not the people who you work for, but you have to make sure that you have and working environment that actually then also the digital youth can do their job.

So, now I'm jumping into the year 2020, and I start with coming close to the, my actual talk.

but I thought it was important for you to understand where I'm coming from. So currently, what we could look at at Eter Ache was the comparison between industrial production and construction sites, and I always get interested in something where I don't know the answer. And this is something we find on construction site. It's unstructured, dynamic, shared workspaces, low degree of automation in the digital gap, and moreover, if we

really want to create an impact, we created on the construction site. We do not create it anymore in planning, or maybe it just little, little steps, but the big steps, as you can also see here in the comparison between mass optomization and the normal construction site mass optimizations 50 times faster than the normal construction site. So if we just increase from 1 square meter per man hour or human

to 2 square meters per hour. We have an increase of 100%.

So this is where robotics probably get adopted, and there is another thing that I or another domain that I'm quite interested in is demolition or controlled deconstruction similar to medicine, robots get into the market where humans are less precise or whether the risk that a human can die is higher.

than the actual machine does something wrong, so that's why we will see from my point of view, construction robots in the deconstruction fairly soon.

and I had the chance when I started that I was looking, uh, across the border, across the Dutch border to Kakkada, where there was a really nice project. It was called Superlocal, um, where the idea was material harvesting and they had 3 high-rise buildings or precast high-risk buildings where one was demolished, one was deconstructed, one was refurbished. And so it was for me

pretty clear that we actually need

some assistance to be able to deconstruct it in a better way.

Now I need sound

please

is one of the most critical economic sectors for current climate change, accounting for over 39% of global CO2 emissions.

Current construction contains over 28 billion tons of concrete. This is 42% of the global building materials supply.

Cement, which is the basic material of concrete makes up 8% of global CO2 emissions.

28 billion tons of concrete represents a significant source of secondary building parts for reuse, and interdisciplinary team at the Chair of Individualized Production at Arvita Aachen University is developing new methods for material harvesting by increasing the levels of automation in the deconstruction process. The Roboton Research Project bridges this technological gap by transforming an existing manual demolition machine into an automated deconstruction robot. The hardware of the existing Brock de

construct ion machine is extended by attaching motion sensors for each axis. The deconstruction robot is supported by a 2nd mobile robot for environment detection and component recognition.

A digital twin is connected to the robot control through a newly developed user interface. The Roboton Project researches into precise movements of the automated rock joints in Hiltisa. The movements are virtually preplanned, then adapted to construction site requirements.

Concrete is a new source of secondary building material. The aim is to increase the lifetime of existing concrete construction. The Roboton Research Project enables automated deconstruction and the creation of new building processes for modular reuse of harvested concrete building parts. The future goals of the Roboton Research Project increased the control deconstruction by 40%.

increase worker safety through automation. We use 70% of existing concrete building construction for the extraction of secondary building parts, reduce global cement-based CO2 emissions by 1%.

Yeah, so the idea was pretty simple. We just took an existing

demolition machine, added a hiltisa and created a new robot through just integrating sensors and uh a new control system, and this is where now AI starts getting interesting because it was not so easy.

to reverse engineer, uh, the inverse kinematics like um in industrial robots, just due to the fact that hydraulic systems behave differently.

according to temperature, according to whatever.

Um, so what was interesting for us, the system evaluation just the manual setup time to towards the robot setup, which where we could actually decrease the setup and disassembly time by 83%, and have an accuracy of 1.5 millimeter, which is not possible usually with a hydraulic machine, and then it's getting interesting.

Uh, what we are working on right now is if you have now a digital machine, you can actually integrate AI and automatic um sowing processes. You can create analysis of cut and joint dimensions. You can optimize the sowing process, for instance, to produce precise dry joints you can inline inspect Hazara's contamination, so you can just add intelligence to the

whole system and um the automated assessment of the processed water, which is also quite important because as we know it's not enough to just get some material out of a concrete. The concrete can be different. 1 m or 10 m next to where you have actually tested.

OK, so, um, another AI integration that I'm going to come back is also the site supervision, so obviously the, the integration of the positioning of the machine to the component and the whole actual spatial and situational awareness.

Another project, uh, we are working a lot in refurbishment, so one of the things that we really also want to get rid of his scaffolding. That's also one of the highest risks on constructor sites. And so, um, this system actually won the Baumer Innovation Award this year. Palmer is one of the biggest fairs for construction engineers and or construction machines, and now I have another video with probably a loud voice.

The future of construction is researched at the Reference Construction site of the Center Construction robotics to tackle the shortage of skilled craftsmen. Max is a first automated plug and produce solution to revolutionize scaffold-free facade refurbishment. MAC stands for mobile Assembly X System. Based on the initial patent, an industrial robot works seamlessly with a crane, first tested in a controlled environment. The robot platform

consists of a multi-sensor kua robot for automated assembly of Thunder Max facade panels. Vacuum grippers and the adaptive guiding system allow the controlled lifting of the robot to ensure accurate positioning. Max was then further developed under real conditions and integrated with a mobile Jacko crane. One key innovation is the automated learning of Macs to continue the assembly strategy manually performed by a craftsman.

Max is therefore the first plug and produce system for the future craftsmen being quality controlled via a tablet with no further programming or preplanning skills needed. A second key innovation is that the Jecko crane is controlled by a kuca robot via 5G for safe operation. Max will tackle the skilled labor shortage with speed, safety, and ease to use. Maxwell opened the European refurbishment market of €400 billion to small and

medium construction enterprises. Together, we max refurbishment.

Yeah. So here, the idea was obviously that we did not want to have a BI model. We did not want to have any, yeah, any uh surveillance, yeah, so that the machine also can understand the

pre-work from a worker on site and then just continue the sequence like the worker was doing.

Um, what we are working on here now in the center construction robotics, so this was also founded in 2015 and we founded the reference construction site which is the first European testbed of around 4000 square meters. We built also a little community now, but a good community, hopefully Europe, European-wide, and you can still see that there are some blank spots in Fin

land and in Norway, so we are open for further collaboration just because what we need to do is we have to combine the strengths of users and enablers.

And together we do different projects. So in this case it is completely clear. We have been hearing this also throughout the conference that the construction site is actually a market of different vendors with information, and what we do have to do is these vendors have to be able to communicate. So my vision is that people have to understand each other no matter what information they share.

but it will not be as it was the idea in the last years or centuries that there is a single source of truth that we can force the whole value chain on one single platforms, but we have to understand that people, vendors are individual, and that we actually need

this individuality also in our systems, and this is also where AI can come and help us.

So what is important to that everybody speaks the same language. Um, we actually

uh, look,

into the European market, construction market where the vision is that we only provide the standardization, how the documentation or data should be described, but the information for the project and the access to the data remains with you and your partners.

And then obviously everybody can get a stand in this European construction market and how we do that is that uh we can describe information, for instance, with ontologies and linked data to enable this standardization and uh to just integrate whatever information you have.

One of my jobs obviously is to write these such standards, so that's what we are doing currently in Germany. If you really also want to read like 900 pages in a book, then this is also a book that um but you need to know German. Unfortunately, yeah, and, and the idea is actually that also we've heard this before. Teams are not only robots. Teams are also humans, and

people are not using software or platforms in the same way, so we always have a value chain with a different um degree of digitalization and also this different degree of digitalization should be in such a flexible system that it doesn't matter if the information is handed over by voice if the information is handed over by a drawing if the information is handed over whatever, but the information must be handed over.

And what I realized in the last years or so since the beginning in 2000, is that only 10% of the planning data really reaches the construction site. As an architect, I was frustrated in 2003 that only 1% of my information got digitally on the construction site. So actually there is a huge gap between BIM models and construction sites, so we can still try getting better in where we

are already quite good if we don't really

bridge this gap, then there is no way that digitalization and also then later on we always recapsulate and re redo in the same information all over again. Also, in the whole circularity.

So one idea, um, this I've, I've seen a lot of LLMs and, and in this conference, but this is something which is already probably in our sense a little bit old because this was from 2022, so there we actually combined uh everything

on the construction site to make use out of the information that we actually produced and also make use out of the machines that we have. So how does this work? So one of these um example like an AI and reg pipeline could be what is the skeletal construction process for for a certain week in a year, and then the model actually retrieves the data

from the BIM models shows you how far the construction site is, and you can get all the information. Another example, for instance, is something that you can't get out of models is if, for instance, a robot would like to control a lift like a simple machine. How would this look like? Like, for instance, the safety standards, if you have a shared environment with humans and with machines, then obviously you have to combine

these different capabilities, so the idea is not that all stupid or simple machine on the construction site should be integrated with cameras and sensors, but you can actually share capabilities. In this case, one robot could be, for instance, here for their eyes and for the vision control and the other can just work. Um, and then obviously you have to contextualize it, so our idea is that we are not going to draw and to model everything.

but we will have simple control just by creating the text-based context in the background, then you can put this instance in, in, in the Trile store and then just a sign this situation to any machine that worked together.

Another example, for instance, if workers can then just control the machine by itself. They can just reach out with the mobile phone and just lift come down before it actually transports the material to the lift, and this all gets uh orchestrated actually through our edge server on the constructorsite, so you give the command and the edge server sends the command to the, to the actual machine.

One thing which is quite important here is also, as we've heard in this conference, logistics. So if you look at the survey, only 30% of the work on construction sites is the actual work of construction. A lot is in logistics, so about 30% is logistics, 10% of the cost is only transport and searching for tools and materials. This is also something where we could go in. So if we

increase, for instance, the logistics optimization, then we increase the efficiency by a minimum of 10%, so this can also be one of these pipelines where like the eye is actually talking to the uh local large language model and then in the knowledge graph you have aIM information you have, uh, different processes you have timesheets you can actually integrate everything that

is useful for the construction site. And so this is one of these examples with the logistic so that the human actually asks for uh material, the human is located on the constructors side, so it, it has the relation exactly what wall or where the material is used and then some logistic person, um, provides the material

and then the, the process in between these two people should be autonomous. So our vision is

that all logistics should do, should go by night. So when workers come to the construction site in the morning, the materials where it should be, the whole documentation is done by the robots as it should be. It's documented. It's, it's uploaded to the BIM so that they know where and what has been built the last day, and um

during night, robots can easily work autonomous.

Um, what is also great in if you have this capability matching of machines on the construction site, you ask for availability similar like you ask for an Uber and then the closest robot comes to you. Uh, this is also something that can work here, but you can add tasks and processes to the machines. I've just heard in the last um

vision from my pre-speaker in one of the conferences that they would actually like machines to be teammates. That's something that should work because you can just tell, OK, bring me some tiles or bring me some facade panels, but then when you drive past by the wall and also tell me how far the wall is actually and and give me the information if the drywall is already finished.

ed As you can see, the logistic person can see in real time, really where the machines are, what they are doing, and then if they just drive by someplace, they can also give another command. OK, can you just have a look if the drywall is, is OK or not?

So these are just little examples on our little playground that we are looking at, but it can obviously be, yeah, prepared in the next level and in this case, for instance, the robot arrives to the to the actual mounting space and then asks another robot, please come and help me transport the the the panels

into my um

lift where then our robot, the max system, can actually install the panels. So these are all parts that could work.

or that work currently in our site, but there's one obstacle, and the obstacle that we look

now, I think everybody knows where is my router? Do I have a connection or not? And obviously signal loss, signal strength estimation in nomadic networks is important. So if there are any people trying to get new startups. I can tell you this is the new profession that we are looking at, uh, because we have to understand what the prediction of the network and

the project timeline is when to put what um router to what position so that there is no shadowing or no robot losing connection. Uh, this is also something which is pretty new. We just published this this this uh this month, um, the requirements for the ICT infrastructure on construction sites. So, um, because what we actually

need is the zone of implicit trust because not all our value chain can just come with the digital, uh, whatever, um, uh, drones and, and um other devices because usually there is a lot of interference and then again we discuss who is reliable or who is liable for what.

So what do we need for an AI enabled construction site just short briefly in the shrapnel, we need a robust ICT infrastructure. We need sensors and machines, so a cyber physical system, and we need data that is structured with minimal information so that machines and humans can understand, and I would like to see that in our planning processes we

model less, we draw less because the models should just be in representation, a visualization of what we actually have organized and I would also like to invite you because the next huge project we have just started in this year is our new excellence cluster, where we actually

deep dive into new materials, into new processes, but also how are AI fleets, how are human human workers working with machines. So we are looking for construction companies. We are looking for workers that we can interview. We would like to do this, uh, European-wide. So please, if you are interested to um have your workers um be, yeah, collaborating with us, then I would like to collaborate also with

some Finnish companies and everything that I showed from 2010. I actually have to thank my team. They are the awesome thinkers in the background, and yeah, uh thank you very much. And if you have any further information, then I'm welcome for questions.

Thank you, Siri, Professor, uh, you clearly saw us what future will hold. What do you think will be the mainstream application maybe in the 5 years that actually will be, we will see in construction site. I think logistics and also everything that has to do with deconstruction. So I think there is a lot of uh possibilities to, to improve and I think that

workers will also like everything to be prepared for them. They don't want to actually clean up. They don't want to put their tools away. So if these machines can do, if machines can do that, I think they will be happy. Sounds great. Any questions from the audience there in the middle, maybe we get the microphone there. Ah, OK. Hello.

Sigrid excellent talk. Thank you. Very inspiring. I'm curious, how much does this change with humanoid robots? With humanoid

this is like forcing a construction site to be a manufacturing plant, but we have hands and feet and want to walk upstairs. So there's like natural limitations to something with

a tractor. I mean, to be honest, our strategy is more in digit digitalization of construction machinery.

because obviously, like the Brock robot that you saw is in the market for 40 years, so the robustness of the machine is there for the market. I just think that industrial robots or humanoid robots to get them really, yeah, proof and also the, you know, the, the ratio between the, the weight uh and what they can lift. Uh, I think Pia Paolo has also talked about this in, in his, in, in his talk.

So I mean, I, I

I actually currently I'm going with construction machines.

That's, I mean, I've a lot of things that I could still talk about, so we actually had a crane, um, upskilled to be a logistics center so that the crane is perfect for documentation, just also not, not just you, but also the machine data you can also use AI and understand quite well what it is actually carrying you to the, to the same curves. Yeah, so it, it

does understand if it's carrying like iron bar or something else, so there is a lot where AI can help without any vision control, yeah.

Good. Anything, any other questions?

there in the middle, in the front?

Maybe that's the last one at this stage, and more be can continue that. I hope you answer if somebody puts their question to the event.

Uh, I also want to thank you for super interesting and inspiring presentation, uh, but I'm an architect, so I was a little bit curious when you're in the end said that you wanted, uh, I understand less data from us in our models. Would you want to, because we always think we want to put so much data in them, would you want to sort of develop on that for a little bit?

Um, well, this would be like you, you saw that there was a little house on our, so this was also developed in the European project which was called Target X together with architects.

And so we all sat on the same table and said, OK, what is the information that is important for architecture. I mean, architects from my point of view are, I mean, they are there for, you know, what surface, what, what is, I mean, what is the room structure and things like this. They are not there to really tell everybody what is in the wall, what is in the structure, yeah. So this has always been a little bit of discussion between architects and civil engineers, so who is respons

ible for creating the structure and detailing, and so on. So I think if all this value chain would sit together and just define the minimum information that is important for them to provide, then I think we would have less more problems with each other because I was working as an architect, I was working for structural engineers. I was working for construction companies, so I know the problems.

OK, so you think within the world should come from the structural engineer. Yeah, I just think that we, you know, sometimes, and, and that, that's also what I like on constructors side.

we have to lose and relax tranquilo tranquilo a little bit and not try to control everything, yeah. Sometimes it's good to just let it go because sometimes you have the result 3 or 4 months later.

and uh I think we need systems that that help us.

um, just not to over panic and overload information and for instance information that no one needs. Yeah, when I was drawing the Kuntzos gas and the 3D model. I don't know how, how often I redrew it, so that's why we then took, uh, you know, rhinoscript and things like this into account because I was just tired of just redoing plans.

Um, and, and this is something which is just the normal process of, yeah, you, you try something, OK, then some other

uh engineer says, OK, please, I would prefer to have, you know, a bigger ball or a smaller ball or whatever or a thicker wall or another material and then the construction company comes in and says, Oh, and I know how to build cheaper, yeah, and then all your plants that you've drawn, you just throw into the bin, yeah? And so, yeah, that's why probably I, I said in, in, in German, there is this word for for for passion, which is called

Leschaft, which means suffering. So suffering is always there before you, you get passionate about something, yeah. So my passion is for communication, and we need to just communicate in a very

simple way. And the question is, if we have to upskill people through the technology or if the technology has to downscale to people, and I think the latter is more important.

Thank you. Super interesting also, yeah, excellent answer. Good question, an excellent answer. Thank you, Professor Sigrid. Let's give it a big hand.

Sophie, closing words, and I need also one session chair here, Sergei Boar Belakom.

So we have a few words for at the end here. OK, not yet visible and you know, addition to keynote speakers which we invite here, we have this kind of this open call for speakers every year starting somewhere from summer and during the autumn we go through a huge amount of abstract abstract and based on them, we are selecting present uh presentations here and uh during these two days program committee has continued

the work that they have done earlier. So we have also evaluated the presentations during these days.

And we have actually selected the best presentation

of this seminar

of this conference, and it's from uh Sean conceptual design, and that's why I invited Sergei here who

who was chair there. So maybe you can tell us why we selected this was done by all from program committee member together.

I prepared a few words for that.

Uh, she gave us practical, clear examples and well-structured presentation of the usage of AI.

Her audience was given an insight on the concept to the working prototype.

This presentation was chosen by our program committee.

as the most inspirational and captivating highlight at AIAEC 2026.

Congratulations, Cja Suakkaran.

Welcome

So today you only get hawks.

There's like and actually

so

I can also congratulate her, congrats us well done. So, and, uh, you will also get a free ticket for next year. Oh, really? Wow. And we get the first participants.

So they would be at least one person in next year, and you will also get certificate. It comes, I'm genuinely surprised. I didn't know something like this is happening. So thank you so much.

Genuinely overwhelmed because I was not really sure what I'll be talking about, how it'll go, but the fact that this has happened is superb. Thank you.

And thank you for your presentation. Thank you.

Bye.

And of course, we want to thank all who have made it possible. So they are sponsors, partners,

and especially also presentation as we just so one example. So that's, that is what all this makes possible and organizes so naturally. And

this group here, we have a very, very nice again. I think we have haven't had, we have enjoyed, we have had fun.

We have, we have, we, I think people have been happiest, maybe it's catchy. I don't know if you noticed, but of Finland has been voted 9.

9th time in a row, happiestness in the world.

So you know, we became first happy and 3 years later we were interested about AINAC. So, so that's how it goes.

But we have a lot of good discussion and I'm sure that we have found some good collaboration possibilities, and they are still open invitations, as you noticed. There was some peace they play the possibilities announced today, some possible cooperation we see so the open invitation in the air.

Again, feedback survey for you. You will also get it by mail.

mail and you will be reminded, but it's also here in Barcelona. Please do it. We will utilize it and we will read it very thoroughly through.

And if you missed

the presentation, the task was awarded or some other presentation because they were in two different rooms, so

I think

organization and the head of organization will a little bit promised that maybe those are already ready on Monday there in a platform, but you will be announced about it. So then you can watch the ones you missed and of course for colleagues share that to share the information and what, what inspired you and so on. I know that your brain is

swallowed and full of information, but I won't give you easily. So this is something to think about when you go back home.

So,

it's, it's not all here. So you can read more about internet site, but the example of what might happen. So we haven't talked too much about artificial genera intelligence today or yesterday, some sentence was mentioned, but not in general.

Will it come? Will it not? But what happens here or two before that is superhuman coder.

which it doesn't need human

And there's propailistic curve from several different sources, and if you look at the curve, it's not

it's not too far

what might happen

and then happens a lot

So

something, something will happen but we don't, don't totally yet understand, but

what happened during one year we see it. I hope I see many of you next year. Thanks for your participation.

--- SUMMARY ---

Summary

At the "AI in AEC 2026" event's "Closing Session," speakers Sigrid BrellCokcan and Vesa Järvinen delivered an insightful exploration of robotics and AI's transformative role in architecture, engineering, and construction. BrellCokcan traced her journey from early CAD environments and Rhino 1.0 to the adoption of industrial robotics in 2010, catalyzed by the affordability of used robots post-2008. She emphasized the integration of Grasshopper by David Rutten with robotics, enabling novices to simulate processes effectively, and the widespread adoption of Kuka PRC, a robotic platform with over 1.5 million annual downloads.

Innovations like the Robiton research project, which automates deconstruction to harvest materials and reduce concrete's environmental impact, and the MAX system, a scaffold-free facade refurbishment solution that won the Bauma Innovation Award, were highlighted. BrellCokcan advocated for bridging the digital gap between planning and construction sites, emphasizing minimal information modeling and flexible systems to accommodate varying digitalization levels.

Projects such as Kunsthaus Graz and TargetX illustrated the challenges of integrating architectural and structural data, underscoring the need for collaboration across the value chain. Circularity in construction was a key focus, with discussions on controlled deconstruction, material reuse, and the role of cyber-physical systems and edge servers in real-time data processing.

AI's applications in logistics optimization and site supervision were explored, envisioning autonomous night operations where robots manage logistics and documentation. BrellCokcan addressed the challenges posed by hydraulic systems in robotics, emphasizing robust ICT infrastructure and standardized data. Large language models were also discussed for their potential in construction processes.

Regional collaboration gaps in Finland and Norway were noted, with an open invitation for partnerships on European-wide projects. The speakers stressed the importance of community building and communication in advancing construction technology, highlighting AI and robotics' potential to address labor shortages, improve efficiency, and reduce environmental impact. The session concluded with a call for collaboration on future projects, emphasizing the need for systems that adapt to human workflows while fostering innovation.

Speakers

SB

Sigrid BrellCokcan

Director of Individualized Production

RWTH Aachen University

VJ

Vesa Järvinen

-

AINS Group / A-Insinöörit

